# EE 445L Lecture -- 9.26.16

## Project 4 notes

No packets are lost b/c TCP is the communication protocol.

Key element of SPI: send/receive messages on opposite edges of the clock


```
      | beginning of data-available window
____  |      ________________
    \ |     /
     \|____/
      |

```

## Consequences of sampling

1. you're limited from -1/2 fs to 1/2 fs

2. Frequency resolution limited to f/N.

```
dB_fs = 20 log_10 (V/V_fs)

where V_fs = full-scale voltage
```

Sawtooth wave is the output of the DAC. Lab 5 related question?

    - What DAC parameter is visible by the sawtooth wave?

        - Monotonically rising!

How many bits do you have?

    - Made a sine wave out of a table, used interrupts

    - 12-bit data, how big is the size of the table?

        - Table is 256 entries, so you're only going to generate 8 bits worth
          of data (unless you add an analog filter)

## DAC Performance

- Resolution

- Speed, maximum sampling frequency

- Monotonicity

- dynamic range, ratio of max to noise floor

- Total Harmonic Distortion + noise

You should understand resolution and monotonicity

- Precision

- Range

- Resolution

- Accuracy (see slides, DAC parameters)

### Resistor Strings

4096 resistors, all lined up in series from 3.3V to GND

Digital logic picks the correct voltage from the 4097 options

At least two interrupts-- one very fast interrupt to generate the wave, one
very slow one to generate the music (interrupts at the tempo of the song)

## Systems

This lab (lab6) is all about translating a design into a PCB.

Power Budget

- Average Current < E/t_life (where E is the energy capacity of the battery)
