# GOV 310 Lecture -- 1.25.17

## Declaration of Independence

Influenced by John Locke's *The Second Treatise on Government*

- Had the idea of a "social contract" with the government

- People were "created equal, had certain rights, and government got its powers
  from the people it governed"

Lincoln really brought back focus on equality in the declaration of
independence by invoking it during the Gettysburg Address.

## Articles of Confederation

The first constitutional framework.

In the articles of confederation, the *state* is the most powerful actor.

- In contrast, we are a federal union now (stronger central government)

- Each state was *almost* a separate country. Almost EU-like in its union.

    - Central gov't can make war or peace

Problems with confederation: the states stopped being friends.

- Problems:

    - Lack of: power, taxes, commerce, chief executive, money, federal court
      system

    - Couldn't force states to play nice with each other (commercial warfare)

Big question: were the states independent countries who loosely joined
together, or were they an interconnected country?

Breaking point: Shay's rebellion

- After revolution, gov't didn't have enough money to pay the soldiers, so they
  paid them in scrips (basically IOUs)

- States needed money to pay back backers of revolutionary war, so they raised
  taxes on farmers (many of whom were soldiers in the revolutionary war

    - States aren't accepting the scrips, so they started forclosing farms

    - Farmers marched on the courthouse to stop it from opening (and prevent
      the forclosures from occurring)

    - Protest grows rapidly, other states aren't helping each other

    - Massachussets barely puts the protests down, and it scares the states.

## Constitutional Convention

Primary driver for the convention (1787) was Shay's Rebellion (1786)

- This was about as fast as a convention could have possibly been organized at
  that time

- 74 delegates invited, only 55 show up and only 40 really participate

- Proceedings were kept secret (since this technically was treason against
  their home states)

Who were the founders?

- Well educated and versed on philosophy

- James Madison led the show. He took crazy copious notes about the convention,
  he's the reason we know what happened
