# GOV 310 Lecture -- 1.27.17

## Constitutional Convention (cont'd)

By the end of August, 11 of the 55 delegates invented excuses to leave.

The constitution written by this convention is the longest-standing
constitution in the world.

### Things they agreed on

- Scrapping the articles of confederation

- A stronger national government

- National regulation of interstate commerce

- Republican form of government (interests of the people represented through
  elected leaders)

- Balanced government where no one interest would dominate

### Things they disagreed on

- A strong national government (nationalists) vs. states rights
  (anti-nationalists)

- Representation in Congress

    - Two big plans were debated

        1. Virginia Plan (big states liked this one)

            - 3 branch gov't

            - bicameral legislature

            - both house's membership determined proportionately

            - lower house elected by people, upper house elected by lower house

            - legislature very powerful

            - Executive was planned, but existed to ensure the will of the
              legislature and so was chosen by the legislature

            - Formed a judiciary, life term appointments by legislature
              (could impeach any national officer)

            - Executive and some of national judiciary would have th epoewr to
              veto legislation, subject to override

            - National veto power over any state legislature

        2. New Jersey Plan (small states liked this one)

            - Current congress is maintained but granted new powers. For
              example, they can set taxes and force their collection

            - Executive, elected by Congress was created, allowing for a
              multi-person executive

            - Executives served a single term and were subject to recall based
              on the request of state governors

            - A judiciary appointed by the executives with life terms of
              service

            - Laws set by the Congress took precedence over state law

            - One state, one vote.

- Slavery

- The Presidency

### The Great Compromise (Connecticut Compromise)

- Bicameral legislature

    - Lower house elected by population

    - Upper house, each state gets two

- Revenue

    - Can enforce taxes, but want tax laws to be close to the people.
      Therefore, all bills relating to revenue and taxation had to be started
      in the House of Representatives.

- Slavery

    - North states wouldn't push on slavery if the South would close their
      ports to British trade.

    - 3/5ths Compromise

        - Allowed the South to use slave population as 3/5ths for purposes of
          taxation and representation in the House of Representations.

        - 3/5ths is the magic number that gave the North and South the exact
          same number of representatives in the House

        - Result: increased southern power

- The Presidency

    - Framers worried about creating a monarchy. Evident by weak executives
      proposed by the VA and NJ plans.

- Electoral college system

    - Most novel aspect of the Constitution, since there's no real precedent.

        - Votes are cast indirectly to a slate of electors pledged to each
          parties candidates

        - Each state gets 1 vote for each House member & 1 vote for each
          Senator (the minimum number of electors is thus 4 per state).

### Government Structure

Limited Republican Government

- Federalism (power divided between national government and states governments)

- Separation of powers (power divided between branches of the national
  government)

- Checks and balances
