# GOV 310 Lecture -- 2.1.17

## The Constitution (cont'd)

### The Amendment Process

What are the six amendments that got through Congress but failed at the
State level?

- Apportionment of representation

- Nobility and Titles

- Amendment to forbid Congress the power of abolishing slavery (1861)

- Child Labor (1924)

- Equal Rights Amendment (1982)

- District of Columbia (1989)

Why are there so few amendments?

- Balance between power of states and federal government

- Deliberative will and not a passing fad

How have they been used?

- Add or subtract from national power

- Expand electorate and its power

- reduce power

- Limit state power

- Structural changes in government

### Judicial Interpretation

Constitution gets change dby decisions and interpretations of the supreme
court.

- Judicial Review (Marbury v. Madison)

- Fundamental Right to Privacy (Roe v. Wade)

Political Practice

- Political parties and conventions developed things have changed over time--
  more technology

## Overview of American Development

American history is a story of a republic that has limited government with
restrictions on direct participation that has become increasingly more
democratic over time.

### Federalist 10

- James Madison wrote it

- What is a faction?

  An interest group, people unified under a purpose.

- 2 ways of curing factions

    1. Remove the cause (solve the reason why they gathered together)

        - "Destroy liberty" by giving everyone the same opinions and interests.
          This is worse than the disease

    2. Control the group (regulate them)

        - This is impossible. We have a zeal for differing opinions.

        - Why do we have factions?

            - Unequal distribution of property: creditor/debtor,
              manufacturers/merchants

- What's left to do?

    - Regulate the differences with a legislature

    - But what if legislative members part of factions?

    - Instead of trying to control how many factions appear, "extend the
      sphere": allow for lots of different groups

        - by doing so, no group gets enough power
