# GOV 310 Lecture -- 2.3.17

## Different forms of government organization

### Federalism

Voters vote in both state and national elections. Federal shares power with
states. Federal govn't and states derive authority from people

### Unitary Government

Voters vote for national gov't, and the nat'l gov't calls the shots.

Ex: France

### Confederation Government

Voters vote for a state government. State government tells the national
government what to do.

Ex: Articles of Confederation

### What we've got:

America is a federalist organizaiton.

We have 90,106 governments ranging across national to local and special
districts.

- 5,147 of those are in Texas

- Special districts are the fastest growing form of government

### Good Things about Federalism

- Diverse policies for a diverse population

- Minimizes policy conflict

    - Interstate Compact

      Side deals that states can form (with nat'l gov't approval)

- Closer to people

- Healthy dispersion of power creates more opportunities for participation

- Poly innovation at state levels

- State and local levels good training ground

- Privileges and immunities clause

    - States can't discriminate against the people of other states

### Bad things about federalism

- No national standards can create inequalities

- Dispersion of power can allow groups to protect interests which may be
  undemocratic and contrary to national trends

- Low visibility and information flow about local governments

- Is diversity always good? Bad competition between states
