BME 221 Lecture -- 9.28.15
==========================
Graphical abstract 
	
ECG Paper --
	Extended conference-style abstract
	1-page abstract (just a mini-paper). 1-page is a hard limit.
		Title
		Introduction
		Materials and Methods
		Results and Discussion
		1 figure
		Conclusions
		No acknowledgements
		References
	Weirdly, 0.7" margins
	Download the template online.

	Includes a graphical abstract
		May or may not be a figure in your paper
		Gives a decent idea of what the paper is about.
		For our purposes, can be hand drawn
		examples:
			EOZZ
			Dentritic nanoparticle

ACS Style Guide
	Download the ACS style guide for free online
	Tenses: present or first person is sometimes okay
		If you've already done it, it has to be in past tense.
		The rest of the paper, it depends. Just be consistent.a
	Watch for proper usage of:
		"signficantly" (only for statistical tests. In any other case, say "substantial), "only", "while/since", "respectively" 
	"Comprised" vs. "Composed"
		Marek's opinion: don't use "is comprised of"
	
	Units
		Always have a space between the number and its units.
		Percent is NOT a unit, nor is degrees (in the sense of 360 degrees), so you don't put a space on those.
		Don't half-abbreviate
		If you use arabic numerals, use symbols for your units.
		YOU CANNOT START A SENTENCE WITH ARABIC NUMERALS. IF YOU START A SENTENCE WITH A NUMBER, YOU HAVE TO SPELL IT OUT
			YOU THEN ALSO HAVE TO SPELL YOUR UNITS OUT.	
		For non-scientific quantities less than 10, you spell out the number. Anything 10 or greater, use numerals.
			If it's a scientific quantity, must use numerals and symbols for the units.
	Not "frying a chip", "damaged by electrostatic discharge"
	All numbers that require it should be in proper scientific notation
		DON'T ever have 1E10, etc. 
	In the US, periods go OUTSIDE quotations.
	Personal pronoun is always "We"
