# EE 360C Lecture -- 1.19.17

Today: review of discrete math

## Defining Sets

A set is a collection of *distinguishable* objects, called *members* or
*elements*.

### Relations between sets

Binary relation

- Subset of the cartesian product A X B

    - "=", "<", or "<="

    - The **Cartesian product** `A x B` is a new set with elements `{(a,b)}`
      (i.e. a set with 2-tuples pairing each element of A and B).

- Reflexive relations: the "=" operator and "<=" operator are the only
  reflexive operators

- Symmetric: A relation is symmetric if `a R b` implies `b R a` for all `a, b
  in A`

    - True for "=" only

- Transitive: if `a R b` and `b R c` implies that `a R c`

    - "=", "<", and "<=" are all true

- Antisymmetric: `a R b` and `b R a` implies `a = b`

    - True for "=" and "<="

Any relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive is an *equivalence
relation*.

Consider `R = {(a,b) : a,b in set of N and a+b is an even number}`

- Is it reflexive? Yes.

- Symmetric? Yes.

- Transitive? Yes.

- Therefore: it's an equivalence relation!

A relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive is a *partial
order*.

### Defining Functions

Given two sets A and B, a function f is a binary relation on A x B such that
for all a in A, there exists exactly one b in set B such that (a,b) is in the
set f.

Functions often are also called *mappings*.

- Set A is called the *domain* (i.e. the *argument* to the function)

- Set B is the *co-domain* of f (i.e. the *value* of the function)

Written as: `f: A -> B` or `b = f(a)`

A function *f* assigns an element of B to each element of A.

#### Function Sequences

- Finite or infinite sequences (i.e. limited inputs or unlimited?)

We often talk about functions as only having one argument. If a function has
more than one argument, it's really just a single n-tuple.

Other verbiage: if `f: A->B` is a function, we say that b is the *image* of a
under f.

- The range of `f` is the image of its domain.

- A function is a *surjection* if its range is its codomain. (can be referred
  to as mapping A onto B).

    - `f(n) = [n/2]` over the range of N. Is it surjective? **Yes**. The output
      is in the range of the input

    - `f(n) = 2n` is **not** a surjective function. It could extend to
      infinity.

    - `f(n) = 2n` **is** surjective as a function from N to even numbers.

- A function is an *injection* if distinct arguments to f produce distinct
  values; i.e., `a != a'` implies that `f(a) != f(a')`. Sometimes called a
  *one-to-one function*.

    - `f(n) = [n/2]a` is **not** an injective function from N to N. This is
      because N would require rounding output down when you get fractions,
      producing output duplicates (i.e. *function aliasing*).

    - `f(n) = 2n` **is** an injective function from N to N.

    - Litmus test: if you can reverse engineer the input from the output, it's
      an injective function.

- A function is a *bijection* if it's both injective and surjective. Sometimes
  referred to as a *one-to-one correspondance*. (i.e. you're just remapping
  every element in A to a different element in B)

## Graphs

A *directed graph* or *digraph* G is a pair (V,E) where V is a finite set (of
vertices) and E (the edges) is a subset of `V x V`

```
    1 --> 2
    ^  /
    | /
    4 <=> 5
```

- If (u,v) is an edge in a digraph G, then (u,v) is *incident from* or *leaves* u
  and is *incident to* or *enters* v.

- If (u,v) is an edge in an undirected graph, then (u,v) is *incident to* both u
  and v.

- In both cases, v is *adjacent* to u; in a digraph, adjacency is not necessarily
  symmetry. i.e. in a digraph, u is not necessarily adjacent to v.

- The *degree* of a vertex in an undirected graph is the number of edges
  incident to it (which is the same as the number of vertices adjacent to it).

- In a directed graph, there is *out-degree* and *in-degree*.

### Paths

A *path* from a vertex u to a vertex v is a sequence of vertices
`<v0,v1,...,vk> such that u = v0, v = vk, and every pair along the way is in
the set of edges.

- The *length* of a path is the number of edges.

- A path *contains* both all vertices and edges

- v is *reachable* from u if there exists a path from u to v.

- A path is *simple* if all vertices are distinct

- A *subpath* is a piece of the path.

- In a digraph, a path forms a *cycle* if u = v and the length <= 1
  edge. Such a cycle is *simple* if all vertices other than the end are
  distinct.

- In undirected graphs, a path is a *cycle* if the start and end are the same
  and the length is >=3 and the other vertices are distinct.

- An *acyclic* graph has no cycles.

### Connectivity

An undirected path is *connected* if each pair of vetices is connected by a
path.

- The *connected components* are the equivalence classes of vertices under the
  "is reachable from" relation

A directed graph is *strongly connected* if every two vertices are reachable
from one another

- The *strongly connected components* of a digraph are the equivalence classes
  of vertices under the "are mutually reachable" relation

- A digraph is strongly connected if it has exactly one strongly connected
  component.

### Isomorphism

A graph is *isomorphic* to another graph if there is a 1-to-1 onto function `f:
V -> V'` such that `(u,v) exist in E` if and only if `(f(u), f(v)) exist in E`.

- Essentially relabelling the graph.

### Subgraphs and Transformations

A graph is a *subgraph* of another if all of graph 1's vertices and edges are
contained in graph 2.

Given an undirected graph, the *directed version* of the graph is where you
just add additional edges so that each edge has a back and forth edge.

The *undirected version* of a digraph is just where you remove the arrows.

### Special Graphs

A *complete graph* is an undirected graph in which every pair of vertices is
adjacent.

*Bipartate graph* is an undirected graph in which the vertex set can be
partitioned into two different sets such that every edge in the graph is of the
form (x,y) where x is from one set of vertices and y is from another.

*Forest* is an acyclic undirected graph

*Tree* is a connected, acyclic, undirected graph

*Dag* is a directed acyclic graph

*multigraph* is like an undirected graph but can have multiple edges between
vertices and self-loops

*hypergraph* (missed this definition)

### Class exercise

Prove or disprove:

Let G be an undirected graph on n nodes, where n is even. If every node of G
has degree n/2, then G is connected.

- It's true!

## Trees

Trees are special kinds of graphs.

Types of nodes

- Root (has no parents)

- Sibilings (have the same parent)

- Leaf (a node with no children)

- Internal node (a non-leaf node)

The number of children of node x in a rooted tree T is called the degree of x

The largest depth of any node in T is the *height* of T.

    - The *depth* of x is the length of a path from r to x, where r is the
      root.
