# EE 360C Lecture -- 1.24.17

## Announcements

- Quiz next class (end of class, 15 minutes, closed notes, one question)

    - Should be simple if you did the homework

## Proofs

A mathematical proof is a "convincing" argument expressed in the language of
mathematics.

- It should contain enough detail to convince somebody with reasonable
  background in the subject.

- The proofs we do in this class won't be exhaustive

Vocab

- Definition: an unambiguous explanation of terms

- Prooposition: a statement claimed to be true

- Theorem: a major result

- Lemma: a minor result, used on the way to proving a theorem

- Corollary: something that follows from something just proved

- Axioms: basic assumed truths

- "If A is true then B is true" == "A implies B" == "A => B" == "B only if A"

    - and many more.

### Approaching a proof

The forward-backward method

- Start by writing statements A and B.

    - "Given A, what do I know?" (forward direction)

    - "How would I show B? What is unknown?" (backward direction)

Proofs for this class are "condensed proofs"-- you don't have to show every
single algebraic step, but you **do** need to show every key step and
conclusion.

### Proof Methodologies

#### Proof by Contradition

- Assume the negation of the proposition is true, and show it leads to a
  contraditctory statement

- Example: Prove that there are infinitely many prime numbers.

    - Assume that there are finite prime numbers such that we can write them
      all down. Then, there exists some number q that is the sum of all prime
      numbers plus one. In that case, q is either a prime number that is not in
      our list or is a composition of primes.

        - q divided by any of the factors in p will provide a remainder of 1.
          therefore, it is a new prime number.

- In class exercise: prove that if n^2 is even, then n is even.

    - Assume that there exists an n where n^2 is even and n is odd. Odd numbers
      are of the form (2*k + 1), where k is an integer. Therefore, n^2 is of
      the form (2*k + 1)^2, or 4k^2 + 4k + 1.

      If 4k^2 + 4k + 1 is even, then we can say 4k^2 + 4k + 1 = 2*q, where q is
      an integer.

      -> 2k^2 + 2k + 0.5 = q. Since k is an integer, we have two even integers
      added to a non-integer. Therefore, q cannot be an integer and thus n^2
      cannot be even. There cannot exist an odd-numbered n where n^2 is even.

#### Proof by Induction

- Three steps to an inductive proof:

    1. Start with verifying the base case

    2. We assume the nth case

    3. Use these two to prove the (n+1)th case

- Example: Prove 0+1+2+...+n = n(n+1)/2

    - base case: show this is true for n = 0

        0 = 0(1)/2, true

    - Inductive step: assume it's true for n, show for n+1

        n+1 + n(n+1)/2 = (n+1)(n+2)/2

        (2n+2)/2 + n(n+1)/2 = (n^2 + 3n + 2)/2 = (n^2 + 3n + 2)/2, true

- Example: Prove that the sum of the first n odd positive integers is n^2

    - Base case: n=1. True.

    - Inductive step: Assume n, show for n+1

        See class slides (too much typing!), true

- Example: Prove that if S is a finite set with n elements, then S has 2^n
  subsets

    - Base case: n = 0. 2^0 = 1, empty set makes this true.

    - Inductive step: assume true for n

        For n+1 case, T = S U {a}, where a is some element not in S.

        For all x where x is a subset of S, there are two subsets in T (either
        x or x plus {a}). 2^n*2 = 2^(n+1), true statement.

- In class exercise: The number of degree-2 nodes in any non-empty binary tree
  is 1 fewer than the number of leaves

    - Base case: one node. One leaf, no degree-2 nodes. true.

    - Inductive step: assume true for n degree-2 nodes.

        For n+1 degree-2 nodes, you lose one leaf (converting it to a degree-2
        node) and gain two leaves. Therefore, for n degree-2 nodes with n+1
        leaves, you will have n+1-1+2 leaves for n+1 degree-2 nodes. This
        implies that for n+1 degree-2 nodes, there are n+2 leaves. true.

