# EE 360C Lecture -- 1.26.17

## The Stable Marriage Problem

An *unstable pair* doesn't want to be in its current pair, and a *stable
assignment* is an optimal condition in which the pair's self-interests
reinforce the pairing (i.e. they like each other).

### Formulating the Problem

Consider a set M and W (men and women).

- A *matching S set* is a set of ordered pairs, one from M and one from W. Each
  member of M and W appears in at most one pair.

- A *perfect matching S'* is where every member of M and W appear in exactly
  one pair.

Upper Bounds of the Algorithm:

- There will be at most n^2 iterations of the algorithm.

Does this algorithm produce a perfect matching?

- Theorem: if `m` is free at some point in the execution of the algorithm, then
  there is a woman to whom he has not yet proposed

- Proof: If, at some point, `m` is free but has already proposed to every
  woman. Then, every woman must be engaged (because once engaged, they stay
  engaged, and they would have said yes to `m` if they weren't engaged when he
  proposed). Since all `n` women are engaged there must be `n` engaged men.
  This contradicts the claim that `m` is free.

Is the matching provided by the algorithm a stable matching? (i.e. Correctness)

- Theorem: consider an execution of the G-S algorithm that returns a set of
  pairs S. The set S is a stable matching. (It's true, see slide for proof)

In class exercise:

- Prove that if all men have the same list of preferences and all women have
  the same list of preferences, then only one stable matching exists.

- Assume there are multiple stable matches. If a pair (m,w) and (m',w') can be
  switched to form another stable pair (m,w') and (m',w), this forms a
  contradiction. If m and m' have the same preferences, and w and w' have the
  same preferences, then either m preferred w or w' prefers m'. In either case,
  (m,w') would be unstable because w' would prefer m' and m would prefer w.


