# EE 360C Lecture -- 2.28.17

## Announcements

- Second programming assignment released, due March 28th

- Exam grades going out with Gradescope email "soon"

## Next Topic: Greedy Algorithms

General description: What's the "next best step" I can do?

- How do you decide what the input is?

- How do you decide what "best" is?

### Demonstrative Problem: Interval Scheduling

There exists a set of jobs that take various times to complete. They are
represented in a scheduling graph.

- Two jobs are compatible if they do not overlap

- Goal is to find the maximum subset of mutually compatible jobs.

Consider the jobs in some order. Take each job provided it is compatible with
the ones already taken. (See slides for visual examples)

- *Earliest start time*: consider jobs in ascending order of start time `sj`

```
     |--| |--| |--| |--|
    |-------------------|
```

- *Shortest interval*: Consider jobs in ascending order of interval length 
  `fi - sj`

```
    |----------| |---------|
             |-----|
```

- *Fewest conflicts*: Consider jobs in ascending order of number of conflicts

```
     |--| |--| |--| |--|
       |---||---||---|
       |---|     |---|
       |---|     |---|
```

- *Earliest Finish time*: Consider jobs in ascending order of finish time `fj`

    - This is the optimal solution!

#### Greedy Algorithm

Consider jobs in increasing order of finish time. Take each job provided that
it is compatible with the ones already taken.

- This is O(nlogn)

```
Sort jobs by finish times so that f1 <= f2 <= ... fn

A - null
for j = 1 to n {
    if (job j compatible with A)
        A <- A union (j)
}
return A
```

Theorem: The greedy algorithm is optimal (proof by contradiction in slides)

### Interval Scheduling: Complications

- You don't know all the requests ahead of time or how long the request will
  take

- Different requests have different weights or importances

### Interval Partitioning

Consider restating the problem where one must schedule all requests using the
fewest "resources"

- Lecture j starts at `sj` and finishes at `fj`

- Goal: find the minimum number of classrooms to schedule all lectures so that
  no two occur at the same time in the same room.

- Depth: number of concurrent jobs being scheduled

- Key observation: the number of classrooms needed >= depth

#### Greedy Algorithm

Consider lectures in increasing order of start time; assign lecture to any
compatible classroom.

- Runtime: O(nlogn)

Observation: the greedy algorithm never schedules two imcompatible lectures in
the same classroom

- Theorem: The greedy algorithm is optimal

### Minimizeing Lateness Problem

- Single resource processes one job at a time

- Job `j` requires `tj` units of processing time and is due at time `dj`

- If `j` starts at time `sj`, it finishes at time `fj = sj + tj`

- Lateness = `lj` = `max{0,fj-di}`

- Goal: schedule all jobs to minimize maximum lateness L = max `lj`

#### Greedy Algorithm

Consider the jobs in some order:

- *Shortest processing time*: Consider jobs in ascending order of processing
  time `tj`

- *Earliest deadline first*: Consider jobs in ascending order of deadline `dj`

    - This one is the best!

- *Smallest slack time*: consider jobs in ascending order of slack `dj - tj`

Observation: Optimal schedules have no idle time

2nd Observation: The greedy schedule has no idle time

### Inversions

See slides for more details here

### Greedy Algorithm Strategies

- Greedy algo stays ahead

    - Show that after each step of the greedy algorithm, its solution is at
      least as good as any other algorithm

- Exchange argument

    - Gradually transform any solution to the one found by the greedy algorithm
      without hurting its quality

- Structural

    - Discover a simple structural bound asserting that every possible optimal
      soution must have a certain value. Then show that your algorithm always
      achieves this bound.
