# EE 360C Lecture -- 2.7.17

## From Last Time: Algorithm Analysis and Bounds

### Time Limits

- Linear Time (O(n))

- Linearithmic Time (O(nlogn))

    - Comes up a lot in sorting

- Quadratic Time (O(n^2))

    - Common when enumerating all pairs of elements

        - machine learning example: closest point application

          Given n points and one new point p, what point is p closest to in
          the net?

- Cubic Time (O(n^3))

    - Set Disjointness

- Polynomial Time (O(n^k))

    - Given a graph, are there k nodes such that no two are joined by an edge?
      (where k is a constant)

- Exponential Time

    - Given a graph, what is the size of the largest independent set?

- Sublinear Time

    - Binary search

### Comparison Sorting

- Decision Trees for Comparison Sorting

    - We can view comparison sorting abstractly in terms of a decision tree

    - Performing a comparison sort is like tracing a path through the tree

- Lower bound for the worst case

    - The length of the longest path from the root of a decision tree to any of
      its reachable leaves is the worst-case number of comparisons. i.e., it's
      the height of the decision tree.

    - The lower bound on the heights of all decision trees is a lower bound on
      the running time of the algorithm

Theorem: *Any comparisoin sort algorithm requires Omega(nlogn) comparisons in
the worst case*

Proof: We determine teh height of a decision tree with n! leaves. A binary tree
of height h has no more than 2^h leaves. Therefore:

`n! <= 2^h, so h >= log(n!) = Omega (nlogn)`

## Priority Queues

Motivation for priority queue data structure: stable marriage algorithm.

- Stable marriage algo needs a data structure that maintains the dynamically
  changing set of all free men. It needs to be able to:

    - Add elements to set

    - Delete elements from set

    - Select an element from a set based on some *priority*.

Other motivation: Sorting a list of numbers

The data structure must support:

- inserting new element

- finding minimum element

- deleting minimum element

Viable data structures:

- List

    - Insertion and deletion are O(1), but finding minimum is Omega(n)

- Sorted array

    - Finding the minimum takes O(1) but insertion and deletion take Omega(n)
      in the worst case.

### Defining the Priority Queue

- Store a set of S elements, where each element v has a priority value `key(v)`

- Smaller key values denote higher priority

- Operations supported

    - find element with smallest key

    - remove element with smallest key

    - insert a new element

    - delete element

- key update and element deletion require knowledge of the position of the
  element in the priority queue

### In Class Exercise

- Height of an n-element heap: `log(n)`

- How many nodes are there at height h of an n-element heap?

    - n/2^(h+1) (?) TODO understand this conclusion better

