# EE 360C Lecture -- 3.2.17

## Recap: Greedy analysis strategies

### Stays ahead

Show that after each step fo the greedy algorithm, its solution is at least as
good as any other algorithm's.

- Interval scheduling problem: prioritize by earliest finish time

### Exchange argument

Gradually transform any solution to the one found by the greedy algorithm
without hurting its quality

- Minimize lateness problem: prioritize by earliest deadline

    - i.e. no inversions => optimal solution

### Structural

Discover a simple "structural" bound asserting that every possible optimal
solution must have a certain value. Then show that your algorithm always
achieves this bound.

- Allocate minimum resources for scheduling

## Today: Shortest Path

Given a graph, how do we find the shortest path from one vertex to another?

- Enumerating all paths is way too expensive

- Key element: each edge will have a weight (the cost of the edge)

### Variants of the same problem

We focus on *single-source shortest-path problem*, but there are other
versions:

- *single destination*

- *single pair*

- *all pairs*

### Shortest Path Substructure

Shortest path contains within it other shortest paths!

### Negative weight edges

Negative weights do have applications, but you can get stuck if cycles exist
with negative weights.

Some algorithms assume non-negative weights, but others can handle it.

### Predecessor subgraph

The collection of all shortest paths from source s: G\_pi.

### Strategy

For each vertex, we maintain v.d to be an upper estimate on the weight of the
shortest path.

Relaxation of an edge tests whether we can improve the shortest path known to v
by going through u, and if so, updating v.d and v.pi (where v.d = cost to reach
v and v.pi = shortest path of nodes to reach v)

### Properties of a shortest path

- *Triangle inequality*: for any edge (u,v) in E, we have 
  d(s,v) <= d(s,u) + w(u,v)

- *Upper-bound property*: we always have d[v] >= d(s,v) for all v in V, and
  once v.d reaches d(s,v) it never changes.

- *No-path property*: If there is no path from s to v, we always have v.d =
  d(s,v) = infinity

- *Convergence property*

- *Path-relaxation property*

- *Predecessor-subgraph property
