# EE 360C Lecture -- 4.18.17

## Network Flow

Maximizing flow or minimizing cut

### The minimum cut problem

A flow network

- Abstraction for material flowing through the edges

- G = (V, E) is a directed graph with no parallel edges

- There are two distinguished nodes: a *source* (s) and a *sink* (t).

- c(e) is the *capacity* of edge e.

- Capacity of a cut (A, B) is the sum of the capacities of all edges leaving A.

The minimum cut problem: Find an s-t cut of minimum capacity.

- the min cut represents the "bottleneck" of flow between s and t. In this
  sense, it defines the max flow too (problem duality).

Mathematical Formalization

- An `s-t flow` is a function that satisfies

    - Capacity: for each e in E: 0 <= f(e) <= c(e)

    - Conservation: for each v in V - {s,t}: sum of f(e) for all edges into
      v == sum of f(e) for all e out of v (think Node Rule)

- The value of a flow f is: v(f) = sum of f(e) for all edges out of s

### The maximum flow problem

Find the s-t flow of maximum value

#### Flow Value Lemma

Let f be any flow, and let (A,B) be any s-t cut. The net flow sent cross the
cut is equal to the amount leaving s.

- In other words: sum of f(e) for all edges out of A - sum of f(e) for all
  edges coming into A = value of the flow.

The value of the flow is at most the capacity of the cut

- Corollary: If v(f) = cap(A,B), then f is the max flow and (A,B) is a minimum
  cut.

### Working through a max flow algorithm

#### Greedy Algorithm Approach

- start with f(e) = 0 for all edges

- Find an s-t path P where each edge has f(e) < c(e)

- `Augment` flow along path P

- Repeat until you get stuck

In this approach:

- `Augment` means find the bottleneck of the path and set the flow value for
  each edge to that bottleneck.

Greedy doesn't work because the locally optimal solution is not always the
globally optimal solution.

#### Residual Graph

Residual edge: "Undo" flow sent

- e = (u,v) and e^R = (v,u)

- Residual capacity: 
```
    cf(e) = c(e) - f(e) if e in E
            f(e)        if e^R in E
```

Residual Graph: Gf = (V,Ef)

- Residual edges with positive residual capacity

- `Ef = {e: f(e) < c(e)} U {e^R: f(e) > 0}`
