# GOV 312 Lecture -- 10.12.16

## Reconstruction Overview (1865-1870)

1. Reconstruction can be divided into two periods: presidential and
   congressional reconstruction

2. Reconstruction in Texas never meant "carpetbagger" rule, black rule, rampant
   corruption, or a massive army of occupation, but it was humiliating to much
   of the white population

3. The legacy of Reconstruction was the "de-legitimization" of the Republican
   party and the restoration of conservative white rule

## Timeline (cont'd)

1868:

- Feb 10-14: Election of delegates to new state constitutoinal convention

- Feb 24: Pres. Johnson impeached for violating Tenure of Office Act.
  Acquitted in May by 1 vote

- March: Congress blocks SC from declaring REconstruction Acts '67
  unconstitutional

- June 1868-Feb 1869: New constitutional convention

- July: Democratic Party holds convention at Bryan

1869:

- Feb: Congress requires ironclad oath of all gov't officials in states not yet
  re-admitted (TX, GA, VA)

- April: Texas v. White decided by US supreme court

- April: AJ Hamilton announces candidacy for Governor

- Sept: Gov. Pease resgns in protest against Reynolds' rule of state

- Nov 30 - Dec 3: E.J. Davis elected governor. 2 black state senators, 12 black
  state representatives. Representatives win 3 of 4 congressional seats. High
  point for 19th century TX Republicans

    - E.J. Davis actually fought in the Union army against TX during the war,
      was captured, and almost hanged

    - He won by the black vote, which majorly overpowered the white vote

    - Vote was so close, Davis was viewed as illegitimate

1870:

- Feb: Morgan Hamilton and James Flanagan take US senate seats for TX vacant
  since secession. 12th TX legislature 14th and 15th amendments to US
  constitution.

    - The irony is that the 11th legislature was full of confederate
      sympathizers

- Feb 1870-Dec 1971: 12th Legislature adopts "obnoxious acts"

    - State police (40% black)

    - Localities could be put under martial law

    - Governor had broad power to appoint public officials in the case of a
      vacancy.

        - Present day governor office has incredibly limited power, in part as
          a reaction to the huge amount of power this governor had.

- Mar. 30: TX formally re-admitted to the Union

- April 16: Reconstruction formally ends with state government resuming
  complete authority in civil matters

1871:

- September: Taxpayers' Convention meets in Austin

- October: Democrats win all 4 US house seats

1872:

- Nov: New state elections lead to democrat controlled 13th legislature

- We vote in first presidential election since 1860

## Final overview of Reconstruction

1. Presidentail reconstruction was dominated by conservative unionists,
   congressional reconstruction by moderate, not radical, republicans

2. Reconstruction can be divided into two periods: presidential and
   congressional reconstruction

3. Reconstruction in Texas did not mean black rule, carpetbagger rule, rampant
   corruption, or a massive army of occupation, but it was humiliating to much
   of the white population

4. Conservative democrats returneed to power before the end fo the Davis
   Administration

6. Reconstruction lead to one-party rule in Texas and eventually to the
   disenfranchisement of black Texans

## Constitution of '76 and Return of Conservative Rule (1874-1890)

1. The Constitution of '69 was a negative model for the Constitution of '76

2. The constitutional of '76 provides for the limited state government we have
   today

    - most power is given to the legislature. Primary responsibility: make a
      budget

3. The period from 1874-1890 is a period of conservative rule with the only
   challenge to the democratic party coming from a Greenback-Republican
   alliance in 1882

## Post-Reconsruction:

1. Law Enforcement

2. Debt retirement

3. Disposal of public lands

4. Plight of farmers

## Timeline (cont'd)

1873:

- Dec: Richard Coke elected governor

1874:

- Jan: Edmund Davis leaves office

1875:

- Sept. 6: Convention meets in Austin to write new state constitution

1876:

- Feb 15: State constitution ratified almost 3:1

- Richard Coke re-elected governor
