# GOV 312 Lecture -- 10.11.16

## Civil War Overview (from last time)

1. Texas repelled all major attacks, which focused on the coast and hte Mexican
   border, but Texas was a minor battlefield of the war

2. Texas efforts to add New Mexico to the Confederacy were a total failure

3. Political opposition to the Confederacy existed in many parts of Texas,
   particularly in the Hill Country and North Texas

## Timeline (cont'd)

### 1865

January: 370 TX state troops attack 1400 Kickapoos at Dove Creek

- Kickapoos won

Mar: Gen. Lew Wallace agrees to truce with Confederates along MX border

April 9: Lee surrenders at Appomattox court house

April 14: Lincoln Assassinated

May 13: Truce broken by Battle of Palmito Ranch

June 2: War ends in Texas with formal surrender of Trans-MS department by Gen.
E Kirby Smith in Galveston

## Civil War Overall Summary

- Texas repelled all major efforts to occupy the state but was the "forgotten
  corner" of the Confederacy

- Texas troops briefly held New Mexico for the Confederacy but were ultimately
  defeated

- Significant opposition to the Confederacy exissted among Texans in teh Hill
  Country and North Texas

- Political disagreements existed among Texans over draft, keeping Texas troops
  within state boundaries, impressment, and taxation by the richmond
  government, and martial law

- Lincoln was far more interested in restoring the Union rather than remaking
  southern society

- Defeat of the Confederacy was not inevitable

## Reconstruction (1865-1870)

1. Reconstruction can be divided into two periods: presidential and
   congressional reconstruction

    - Presidential: reconstruction "Confederate-style". Restricted many rights
      to African-Americans, Confederates could hold public office. Formulated
      by Pres. Johnson

    - Congressional: Republican controlled congress is not satisfied. Sometimes
      called "military reconstruction"

        - Incorrectly sometimes called "radical" reconstruction as well.
          Radicals were people who wanted to punish Confederates harshly.

    - Neither group really envisioned a multi-racial society like we have
      today.

2. Reconstruction in Texas never meant "carpetbagger" rule, black rule, rampant
   corruption, or a massive army of occupation, but it was humiliating to much
   of the white population

    - State police was 40% black (wow!)

3. The legacy of Reconstruction was the "de-legitimization" of the Republican
   party and the restoration of conservative white rule

## Timeline (cont'd)

1865:

June 2: Gen. Philip Sheridan assumes command of the Military Division of the
Southwest

June 17: Texas declared under US authority with AJ Hamilton appointed 1st
provisional governor

- Hamilton wanted to fill offices with unionists

- Never elected, only appointed

June 19th: Gen. Gordon Granger with 1800 troops occupies Galveston , declares
all slaves free (Juneteenth Day)

1866:

Feb 7: Convention meets to write new state consitution

June 25: James ThrockMorton elected governor

Aug 9: State officlas take office

Aug 20: Pres Johnson declares rebellion over in TX and accepts Texas as ready
to rejoin the union

David Burnet and Oran M Roberts named US senators but not seated. 

Aug-Nov: 11th Texas legislature meets. Next session in February 1870

Dec: Charles Griffin appointed by Sheridan TX mlitary outpost

1867:

Mar 2: First Reconstruction act. Tenure of Office Act also passed

Mar 19: Gen Philip Sheridan made commander of 5th military district. Gen.
Charles Giffin commander of sub-district of Texas

Mar 23: 2nd Reconstruction Act

April: Ironclad oath required for jury duty, registration to vote. Military
commissions authorized to try civilians. US Army authorized to collect and
disburse state tax.

May: Gen. Giffin assumes right to fill all state vaciancies

July: First Republican state convention at Houston. !st democratic state
convention in July '68

July 19: 3rd Reconstruction Act give smilitary commanders full power to remove
and appoint civil officers

July 30: Gen Sheridan removes Throckmorton as "Impediment to REconstruction"

Aug 17: Pres. Johnson reassigns Gen Sheridan. Griffin temporarily fills
Sheridan's job.

Sept 15: Gen Griffin dies of yellow fever and is replaced by Gen. Josephy Jones
Reynolds as military commander of Tx;

1868:

Feb 10-14: Election of delegates to new state constitutional convention

Feb 24: Pres. Johnson impeached for violating Tenure of Office Act. Acquitted
in May by 1 vote

March: Congress blocks supreme court from declaring REconstruction Acts '67
unconstitutional

June-(1868-1869): New Constitutional convention

July: Dem party holds convention at Bryan
