# GOV 312L Lecture -- 10.25.16

## Progressivism in the early 20th century

1. Progressivism was the major reform movement in Texas from 1900 until
   the 1930s

2. Prohibition and Baileyism were the two most important issues in TExas
   politics during the first decade of the 20th century

3. After 1914, Fergusonism replaced Baileyism as the major issue in Texas state
   politics until the 1930s

## Timeline

1896

- McKinley defeats Bryan. Populist gubernatorial candidate gets 44% of vote

1898

- Spanish American War begins. State dems platform calls for annexation of
  cuba and puerto rico, but not the Philippines. House helps Culberson win US
  Senate seat and Sayers win governor's race

1899

- Law passed exempting labor unions from state anti-trust acts

1900

- Hurricane levels Galveston, killing over 6000

In the 1900-1910 decade, Progressivism takes hold.

- Increased voting (for middle and upper class white ppl)

- Level the playing field between small businesses and big businesses

- Efficiency in gov't decisionmaking-- let experts make the decisions, not
  policymakers

    - Ex: Mayor hires an expert city developer to run the day-to-day 
      operations of the city. City council sets policy, but the expert runs
      the city.

- Child labor laws, worksman compensation, prohibition of alcohol

- Still perfectly comfortable with Jim Crowe laws, etc.

1901

- Discovery of oil at Spindletop

1902

- Poll tax receipt required for voting

    - State constitutional amendment

- John Nance Garner elected to US House

    - Conservative elected to US house 15 times in a row

    - Becomes first texan to be speaker of the house

    - First texan to be the VP of the united states (he hated it)

- Sam Lanham elected Govenor

1903

- State law limiting hours of railroad employees, first child labor laws passed
  by state legislature

    - Very unusual that the legislature was so progressive, even more so than
      the governor

- TX Woman Suffrange Association organized in Houston

1904

- Constitutional amendment ratified permitting the state to charter banks

- State democratic party approves the White Primary

    - Not yet a law-- just a rule of the democratic party

    - Evades the 15th amendment

    - Texas got away with this for 40 years. Crazy.

1905

- Terrell Law establishes regular system for primary and general elections

1906

- 1st election with statewide primary

- Sam Rayburn elected to TX house

- Thomas Campell elected Governor

1907

- Legislature elminiates interpreters at polls, no naturalized citizen can
  receive assistance from election judge unless citizen for 21 years.

- Full rendition law requiring property be taxed at market value

- Robertson Insurance Law

    - Very stringent insurance law, many companies just left TX

- Joseph Weldon Bailey re-elected to US Senate

    - Also ran a law business while being a Senate

    - Started more progressive but shifted to conseravtive

    - After a debacle with a company who lied that he represented, split
      opinions about him

    - Contrast with Rayburn

- Legislature passes laws creating state med board and state board of health,
  department of agriculture, state library, and historical commission

1908

- Prohibition issue becomes prime issue inTexas politics

- Bailey controls TX delegation to Democratic National convention as test of
  party control

1909

- State bank insurance program established

1910

- Oscar Colquitt elected Governor

    - Didn't like prohibition, was conservative

    - Still had some reforms pass

1911

- Statewide prohibition fails in statewide referendum by 6000 votes out of over
  468,000

1912

- Houston state convention elects pro-Wilson delegation. "Immortal 40" stay
  with wilson for 46 ballots

- Sam Rayburn elected to Congress from 4th CD

    - He served in congress for 49 consecutive years

1913

- Joe Bailey retires. Morris Sheppard elected

- Leg passes law closing saloons at 9:30 PM. Also passes Allison liquor law
  making it illegal to ship liquor from wet to dry areas

1914

- James Ferguson elected Governor

    - He's a really great orator and caught ppl's attention, but he had no
      prior political experience

    - Ridiculed his opponent (Tom Ball, i.e. "Tomball)

    - He was a *crook*.

        - Engaged in shady banking practices

    - He gets impeached for using state money

1915

- Legislature passes law regulating rents paid by tenat farmers

- TX Woman Suffrange Assn elects as Pres Minnie Fisher Cunningham

1917

- Ferguson's war with UT leads to his impeachment and conviction

- US enters 1st World War in April

1918

- In special session, TX legislature passes anti-liquor legislation, patriotism
  laws, changes in election laws

- Ferguson defeated by Hobby in Democratic primary

- Annie Webb Blanton elected state superintendent of public instruction. 1st
  woman in TX elected to statewide office.
