# GOV 312 Lecture -- 10.4.16

## Early Statehood Overview

1. Mexican war (war of conquest) seen as plot to enlarge slavery's domain

2. Compromise of 1850 and Kansas-Nebraska Act tried to resolve slavery issue
   but really failed

    - Really a fiasco in every respect

    - Kansas-Nebraska act was the death of the Whig party (2nd major party in
      America for about 20 years), hopelessly divided over slavery

    - Replacement parties were the No-Nothings and the Republicans

        - No-nothings agenda was to bash immigrants, didn't really work

            - Split over slavery

        - Republican party emerged, inherited Whig's economic platform

            - Opposed slavery in the territories

3. The new Republican Party was viewed by most Texans and other southerners as
   a thread to the existence of slavery

## Timeline

1854

- Kansas-nebraska act. Houston votes no

    - Repealing the Missouri compromise was considered breaking a sacred rule

    - Texas prevents Houston from running for office again. He's out of the
      game for a while until 1859 when he becomes governor

- Whig party disentigrates. Know-Nothing party elects gov't officials in San
  Antonio, Galveston, Austin. K-N's in decline by '56

- 1st anti liquor law passed permitting counties to outlaw saloons by majority
  vote (declared unconstitutional and never enacted). Beginning of temperance
  movement in TX

Context here: waves of european immigrants were coming to America

1855: Know-nothing party lead Texas Dem party to nominate candidates by
convention for hte first time. K-N's elect 20 reps and 4 senator sfor state
legistlature

    - First statewide primary in 1906

1856:

    Republicans nominate 1st pres candidate on an anti-slavery platform.
    Republican president candidate wins 38% of the electoral college vote

1856:

    Republicans nominate 1st pres candidate on an anti-slavery platform.
    Republican president candidate wins 38% of the electoral college vote.

        - this is huge!!!

    (Nov) James Buchanan elected. Houston supports Fillmore (American party
    nominee)

        - Buchanen is the last united candidate for the democrats. Last
          democratic for 28 years.

        - Dred Scott splits the democratic party up

1857: 

    Houston (running as Independent) loses to Hardin Runnels in only political
    defeat of his career for Texas Governor

    Dred Scott vs. Sandford

        - Supreme court case

        - Dred Scott was a slave owned by Sanford

            - Scott was taken to Wisconsin, sued for his freedom b/c of how
              long he spent in free country

            - Supreme Court claimed that no black person "had the right to sue
              under the united states"

        - Not only that, but they also said that Congress doesn't have the
          authority to regulate slavery anywhere

        - Really bizarre, historians claim it the worst supreme court decision
          in the history of the united states

        - The most extreme pro-slavery position of all, really the tipping
          point after Kansas-Nebraska

1858:

    March: Lecompton constitution fails to pass US Congress

1859:

    September: Cortina Wars begin along border as Juan Cortina seizes
    Brownsville for serveal days with 1000 men

        - fueled by mistreatment of hispanics in the rio grande valley

        - Even though it had nothing to do with slavery, people projected that
          abolitionists were behind it

    Oct: John Brown and 20 men attack federal arsenal at Harper's Ferry

        - John Brown was an abolitionist, had history in Kansas

        - Tried to establish an abolitionist state

        - Really dropped the ball strategically.

        - Brown was hanged, but before his death he gave eloquent speeches.
          People in the north viewed him as a martyr, people in the south
          viewed his as a terrorist

    Nov: Houston defeats Runnels. TX's 2 congressional districts won by 
    Unionists

        - If a republican was elected, many people decided they would break
          from the union

        - Succession was really triggered by the election of Lincoln

1860:

    April: democratic state convention meets in Galveston. Declares Texas has
    right to secede from the Union

    Sprint: Citizens' committee in Palestine hols book burning of "dangerous"
    publications

        - Uncle Tom's Cabin was one of these publications

    Summer: Texas Troubles. Fires break out in Dallas, Denton, and Pilot Point
    in 110 degree july heat

    Introduction of Kights of the Golden Circle in Texas

        - Secret society at the extreme edge of the democratic party

        - wanted to reopen the african slave trade

        - wanted to create an empire of slavery

    November: Lincoln elected. TX supports Breckenridge

        - really was basically two elections: Lincoln v douglas (north),
          breckenridge v bell (south)

    December: South Carolina 1st state to formally secede from the Union

1861:

    Jan: Convention meets in Austin to vote on sucession

    February: by 166-8, delegates vote in favor of secession. In a statewide
    referendum the vote is 46,129, to 14,697

    March: TX secedes from Union, 25 yeras after TX declaration of independence

    Ofice of Governor declared vacant when Houston refuses to take oath of
    loyalty to Confederacy
