# GOV 312L Lecture -- 10.6.16

## Early Statehood Summary

1. Mexican War was a direct result of hte annexation of Texas by the US, but
   war was not inevitable

2. The Mexican War brought slavery to the forefront of American politics

3. The texas-new mexico boundary controversy was tied to the slavery issue

4. The compromise of 1850 settled the texas state boundary but was part of a
   national compromise

5. The Kansas-Nebraska act destroyed the temporary truce created by the
   compromise of 1850

6. Most Texans were conditional Unionists, and while most Texans didn't own
   slaves, they supported  the institution of slavery

7. Most Texans favored secession after the election of Lincoln but not before.

## Timeline (right before Civil War)

1861:

- January: Convention meets in Austin to vote on secession

- February: By 166-8, delegates vote in favor of secession

    - Statewide referendum, vote is 46,129 to 14,697

    - Germans who came to Texas after 1840s tended to be anti-slavery

    - Central Texas germans put up the first resistance to the confederate army

- March: TX secedes from Union, 25 yrs after TX Declaration of Independence

    - Office of Governor declared vacant when Houston refuses to take oath of
      loyalty to Confederacy

    - Gen. David E. Twiggs in San Antonio turns over federal arsenal to 400
      troops led by Ben McCulloch. Became a confederate general

- April: South Carolina fires on Fort Sumter. War begins as Lincoln issues call
  for 75,000 volunteers

    - first shots of the Civil War

    - Texas is state number 7 to secede

## Civil War (1861-1865)

1. Texas repelled all major attacks, which focused on the coast and hte Mexican
   border, but Texas was a minor battlefield of the war

2. Texas efforts to add New Mexico to the Confederacy were a total failure

3. Political opposition to the Confederacy existed in many parts of Texas,
   particularly in the Hill Country and North Texas

## Timeline

1861:

- May: Capture of Forts Arbuckle, Cobb, and Washita, Indian territory by TX
  state troops

    - No real threats from the north here

- August: John Baylor and TX troops capture southern New Mexico, declaring it
  the Territory of Arizona

- Sept: Gen. Paul Hebert assumes command all TX confederate troops. Abandons
  sabine pass in Sept, Galveston in October '62. Replaced by John Bankhead
  Magruder who recaptures both in Jan '63

- November: Francis Lubbock elected Gov of TX. Louis Wigfall and W.S. Oldham
  elected confederate Senate

1862:

- Jan-june: Gen. Henry Sibley leads brigade of 3500 men into New MX but
  retreats after Unionn troops destroy their supplies at Battle of Glorieta
  Pass on March 28

- April: Confederate Congress enacts 1st conscription act

    - Really controversial (on both sides)

    - Many exemptions

- July: Gov Lubbock and Gov Jackson meeting in Marshall, TX request commanding
  general for Trans-MS department. E. Kirby Smith appointed.

- August: Battle of the Nueces

    - Comfort, TX has the only monument to Union troops in the entire south.

    - German unionists fleeing for Mexico were intercepted by Texas Rangers

- Sept: Confeds abandon Sabine Pass (Oct), "Great Hanging" at Gainesville

    - 40 Unionists were hanged by a "People's Court"

    - Similar situations: Winston county, Jones county

1863:

- Jan: AFter retaking galveston on Jan 1, Confederates recapture fort griffin
  at sabine pass later in the month

- Jan: Emancipation Proclamation

    - Changed the purpose of the war.

    - Used to be about piecing together the Union; now, we're fighting for a
      new nation without slavery

- July: Houston dies in Huntsville at age 71

- August: E. Kirby Smith, commander of the Trans-Mississippi department calls
  conference of western state reps to meet in Marshall, TX

- September: Battle of Sabine Pass

    - less than 50 confederate soldiers defend against a flotilla invasion
      force

- November: Lubbock enters confederate service and pendleton murrah elected

- November 5000 union troops occupy island of Brazos Santiago and Brownsville

- December: Pres. Lincoln sets forth 10% Plan of Reconstruction

    - Amnesty oath: you just have to swear allegiance to the US constitution

    - Ironclad oath: you have never taken up arms against the US government at
      all.

1864:

- March: Union troops occupy Laredo

- April: confederates turn back invasion force heading for Marshall at
  Mansfield LA and Camden AR. Red River campaign.

- April: TX troops recapture Laredo

- July TX troops recapture Brownsville

- Nov: Lincoln/Johnson re-elected
