# GOV 312 Lecture -- 8.25.16

Professor: Prof Enelow
Issues and policies in American Government: Texas Political History

## Syllabus
Lecture style classes, but he likes questions

Questions on test are based off of lecture

    - Book helps to fill in info, but he's covering the material for the tests.

24th and Rio Grande is where is lecture notes are (??) Melissa's bookstore

    something like 20 yrs worth of notes.

Basically, he keeps saying this course isn't supposed to be hard.

Grade is only based on the exams. Raw score, 100 total questions throughout the
semester. This is all we've got.

Sample questions and study sheets are also on canvas.

## Spanish Texas
### Date Overview
1519-21: Hernan Cortes defeats Aztecs in central valley
1519: Pineda sails along Texas coast and maps it
1528-36: Cabeza de Vaca first European to travel through
    First European to "set foot" in Texas
1539-42: Coronado and de Soto expeditions explore all the way to Arizona

- Spain wanted to keep Texas from falling into foreign hands
    Also wanted to spread Christianity to Texas Indians
- Spain's control challenged by:
    1. French
    2. Britain
    3. United States
- Texas was set as a province of New Spain (later Mexico) in the 1690s
    - Spain decided Texas wasn't worth it after they didn't find another rich
      civilization like the Aztecs. Changed their mind around the 1680s.
    - Why? La Salle arrives @ matagorda bay and establishes a French colony
        Spain freaks out, starts looking for him (took them 4 years)
        They decided they needed to work to keep it.
    - French show up again in 1718 and establish New Orleans 
        same year Spanish establish San Antonio
        Spain is feeling threatened
    Spain brought a bunch of missionaries
        Very conservative catholics, spent a lot of money + effort converting
        ppl
            Houston County (north of Harris county) was where the first mission
            was established
            Extended up to northwest Louisiana
        Came along with the soldiers, servants of the King
    Texas was the most unsuccessful mission field Spain ever had
        Some success in San Antonio, but nowhere else
        Spain spent almost 100 years trying to "civilize" native populations.
        After French-Indian war, Spain gave up.
    Texas was valuable buffer zone 
        - south of Rio Grande was silver mines (today North Mexico)
        - Fear was that French or other foriegn power would use Texas as a
          staging area to take over the silver mines
        - mines made up almost 20% of the royal budget at its peak
- After a while, Texas is becoming a sinkhole of money
    Basically rolled back the soldiers and missionaries unless there was a
    perceived threat
- big picture problem: no population!
    bad economic prospects, Texas was too far off the beaten path
    something like 3000 europeans in all of Texas.
- Mexican independence in 1821
    - Anglos kept immigrating into Texas for cheap, farmable land
    - Mexico started letting rich people officially immigrate
    - Stopped working in the 1830s
        Weren't enough native Mexicans, Anglos kept immigrating
