# GOV 312 Lecture -- 8.30.16

## Outline

1. Spain was mainly interested in keeping Texas from faling into foreign hands
   (buffer zone) and secondarily in spreading Christianity among Texas Indians

2. Spain's control of Texas was challenged first by France and later by Britain
   and the United States.

3. Texas was a money-losing proposition for Spain, which repeatedly reduced the
   number of soldiers and missionaries in Texas

## Spanish Colonization Overview

- There were 9 total missions at the peak of Spain's colonization

    - San Antonio was the most successful

    - 6 in east Texas, all failed

    - Natives mostly just weren't interested

- Texas didn't really produce money, so it was a matter of how investment the
  Spanish crown thought that Texas was worth as a buffer zone to protect silver
  against foreign invasions (north Mexico)

- The focus on East Texas was primarily to prevent the French for invading
  (French were currently in Louisiana)

- San Antonio was supposed to be just a waystation but turned out to be pretty
  important

- From map shown in class: Spanish Texas mostly consisted of an arc along the
  east coast extending from San Antonio to Nacadoches

    - Effectively, San Antonio is the oldest establishment

        - Technically it's El Paso, but El Paso wasn't originally part of
          Texas.


## Timeline

- 1519-21: Hernan Cortes defeats Aztecs in central valley of Mexico

    - He never went into Texas, but he served as the "role model" for Spain

    - He kept looking for more rich civilizations after the Aztecs, but no
      dice.

- 1519: Pineda sails along Texas coast and maps it

    - Before his trip, people thought Florida was an island

- 1528-36: Cabeza de Vaca first European to travel through Texas

    - First European to "set foot" in Texas

    - He just got lost... didn't meet the other Spanish ships at their
      rondevouz

    - Tried to make it to the closest Spanish settlement

        - closest was actually Cuba, but they went all the way to present-day
          Brownsville

        - Most of them drowned in storms, the rest washed up near Galveston.
          They had to survive, natives weren't too happy they were there

        - 8 year bizzare crusade to survive

    - Eventually made it to Mexico City, told the viceroy about what he saw.

        - basically a bunch of legends, including seven golden cities

        - this gave rise to Coronado and deSoto's expeditions

- 1539-42: Coronado and de Soto expeditions explore all the way from Florida 
  Arizona

    - Explored all across the panhandle

    - Biggest accomplishment for Coronado: he made it back alive.

        - de Soto didn't

    - They didn't find anything, so Spain was bummed out

    - After this, they started focusing on the silver mines in Northern Mexico

- 1550-85: Silver strikes in Zacatecas, Guanajuanto, San Luis Potosi

    - Kept Florida because it guarded the sea lanes back to Spain

    - Really, there was no positive reason to keep New Mexico, Texas, or 
      Florida

- 1588: Defeat of Spanish Armada by England. Britan and France rival Spain in
  North America beginning in 17th century

    - Considered the turning point of Spain's control of the new world

    - Jamestown (oldest English settlement) is 1607

- 1598: Occupation of New Mexico complete under direction of Juan de Onate

    - Takes northern pass (El Paso) and stays north to use the natives for his
      own purposes

    - He's viewed as being an exploiter

    - Weirdly, New Mexico gets more attention and european population

    - New Mexico is a staging area for many exploratory expeditions into Texas
      (go as far as San Angelo)

- 1609: Santa Fe founded

    - More than 100 years older than San Antonio

- 1629: New Mexican missionaries seek to Christianize Jumano Indians from the
  Trans-Pecos

- 1650: 1st military expedition in to west TX ordered by governor of New Mexico

    - Natives rebelled in the Pueblo rebellion

- 1682: 1st permanent settlement in TX established in El Paso area

    - La Salle descends Mississippi River from Canada and names the country
      Louisiana

- 1685: La Salle lands at Matagorda Bay

    - He was living in "New France" (present day Canada)

    - La Salle travels across the great lakes and follows the Mississippi river
      (they thought it dumped into the Pacific)

    - He went all the way to the Gulf of Mexico

    - Claimed all land that has waters dumping into the mississippi under the
      name of the French king (Louis) as Louisiana

    - *La Salle's presence was a game changer for Texas in that Texas had some
      worth now*

    - almost 90% of the native population of north America was killed by
      european diseases. dang.

    - Hispanola => Haiti (taken by French)

    - Jamaica (taken by British)

    - La Salle got permission to settle the area, but then he couldn't find it
      and ends up landing in Matagorda Bay

    - Very poorly fated expedition, lots of people died

        - La Salle was killed by his own men

        - 15 people survived out of the 280. Not a very glorious reign in
          Texas.

    - Important context: this is *after the Pueblo revolt*.

        - If the french could organize the natives, they could take over the
          silver mines of northern Mexico

        - This fear drove the Spanish to more highly value Texas

- 1690: First Spanish mission in East Texas, San Francisco de los Tejas (*test
  material*)

    - Why: Established to keep an eye out for any new French activity

    - established by Franciscans

        - They didn't want the soldiers there since they tended to not be nice
          to native women (Cato Indians)

        - Natives start dying from the diseases brought over by the Spaniards

    - Catos tell the Spaniards: "Leave or we'll kill ya". Occupation lasts 3
      years.

    - Spaniards retreated 

- 1691: Texas organized as a province of New Spain

- 1693: Spanish abandon East Texas, retreat to Monclova. TX unoccupied for the
  next 23 years

- 1699: End of Hapsburg dynasty linking Spain and Austria. Replaced by Bourbon
  dynasty linking Spain and France.

  - Triggers the war for Spanish Succession

  - Winner is the grandson of the French King

  - Suddenly, *France and Spain are joined together in a royal pact*. (very
    important)

        - Allies (for the most part) between 1700 - 1780

  - French establish fort near mouth of Mississippi R. at Biloxi bay. In 1702
    another fort on Mobile Bay. LA becomes French royal province in 1732

  - France drives a wedge through Spanish North America, separating Florida from
    Texas.

- 1700-03: 4 missions founded along Rio Grande

    - most important: San Juan Bautista. Considered the *Gateway to Spanish
      Texas*.

    - most expeditions begin at or originate from this mission

- 1713-1714: Fr. Francisco Hidalgo sends a letter to governor of LA asking
  French help in missionary work with Indians of East Texas

    - Governer or LA was Sieur de Cadillac, also attributed with founding
      Detroit

    - Extremely risky move for Hidalgo

    - French want to establish trade relations with Spanish Texas so they send
      an emissary to answer the letter in person

        - Fort commander arrests the emissary and places him under house arrest

        - Married the Fort Commander's granddaughter (later made her a French
          citizen)

- 1716-17: 2nd occupation of East TX. Spanish establishes six missions in East
  Texas between Trinity R and Red R in LA

    - *Why: Hidalgo and the french emissary's schenanigans freaked the Spanish
      govt out*.

    - San Francisco de los  Dolores and Los Adaes established on the Camino
      Royale to keep an eye on the French

    - Analagous to the demilitarized zone in Korea (kinda)

    - San Antonio de Valero established (later the Alamo)

- 1718: San Antonio founded as a way station between San Juan Bautista and East
  Texas

    - Founded as a part of the second occupation in order to supply other
      missions in east Texas

    - By far the most successful Spanish settlement in Texas

    - Spanish heirarchy of settlements

        - Pueblo (like a little village)

        - Villa (San Antonio was this)

        - Ciudad (none established in Texas)

- 1719: Chicken War (*ends the second occupation*)

    - French corporal with 6 soldiers capture Adaes mission

    - Los Adaes was guarded by two (2) Spaniards. No soldiers.

        - The two guys flee west and claim there's a huge french army coming

    - Triggered by Spain losing control of Sardina and Sicily.

    - Named because the French ate the chickens at the mission

    - Spanish just leave East Texas thinking they can't fight off the French,
      but they just got bluffed
