# GOV 312 Lecture -- 9.1.16

Picking back up from the Chicken War...

- 1721: 3rd Occupation of East TX. Los Adaes is the new capital of Province of
  Texas. Led by Aguayo.

    - Aguayo leaves behind 270 soliders to protect Los Adaes

    - *Saves Texas from falling under French control*

- 1722: Aguayo establishes La Bahia on the site of Fort St. Louis

    - La Bahia will be moved a couple of times and later become Goliad

    - Aguayo anchors TX for 1st time at 3 points -- Los Adaes, La Bahia, and
      San Antonio. High point of Spanish Texas

    - Los Adaes is abandoned in 1770s, replaced by Nacadoches

    - 9 missions, 6 of which were in east Texas

    - He rebuilt these missions from his own pocket. Got rewarded handsomly by
      the Spanish Crown

    - Aguayo was a Peninsular (i.e. born on the Iberian peninsula, mainland
      Spain). Society had a racial heirarchy, and Peninsulars were at the top.

        - Viceroys and archbishops were always peninsulars

        - Wealthiest land owners and military officials were peninsulars

        - Below peninsulars were Spainards born in Mexico/new Spain: Creoles

            - Creoles were sidelined by the Peninsulars, and resentment build
              up over the course of centuries

            - Was the fuel for the Mexican Independence War

- 1727: Inspection of TX by Gen. Pedro de Rivera and Fr. Miguel Sevillano.

    - In 1720s and 1760s, two official inspections of northern frontier

        - Ranging all the way to california

        - Both times, they recommended closing stuff down and reducing the
          number of soldiers b/c Spain is tight on cash

    - Spain's failure in governance: "To govern is to populate"

        - They just didn't have enough people in Mexico/Texas

    - Biggest threats were the United States and Comanches

        - Comanches had a pretty big empire, and Spain couldn't control them

- 1728: After inspection by Gen. Rivera, slow deterioration of Spanish East TX
  until pullout in 1772

    - pull out then because the french are gone

- 1731: Villa San Fernando de Bexas established with arrival Canary Islanders
  in San Antonio

    - Problem: Texas just didn't have as many economic opportunities, people
      didn't want to come here. They'd rather go to central plains of Mexico

- 1748-55: Effort to establish 3 missions on San Gabriel River a failure

    - Mid 1700's expansion attempted in 4 areas:

        - 3 failures (San Gabriel R., Orcoquisac, San Saba R.)

            - Comanches duped the missionaries into pushing Apaches out, got
              them caught up in this conflict

        - 1 success (lower Rio Grande and south TX colonized by Escandon)

            - Escandon brings 6K people, but most of them are on the Mexico
              side. Only settlement in Texas from Escandon is Laredo.

- 1755: Founding of Laredo by troops of Jose de Escandon. Settles 6k colonists,
  establish 23 towns and 15 missions in area including lower Rio Grande Valley.
  Escandon moves to La Bahia to its present site (later renamed Goliad).

- 1757: Apaches lure Spaniards into Comancheria to establish mission at San
  Saba. Comanches massacre Spanish in 1758. Only TX mission destroyed by
  outright native attack.

- French and Indian War

    - Breaks out near present-day Pittsburgh

    - flash point: French crossed the great lakes, British spread west, and
      they clashed at Pittsburgh

    - Became a "fight to the death" to decide who controls north america.

    - Different native tribes sided with different sides

    - Eventually expels France from North America

    - Spain enters the war on the side of the French, they get schooled.

        - Lose Florida, Cuba, and the Phillipines to the British

        - Eventually, they get Cuba and the Phillipines in exchange for Florida

- 1762: France gives western LA (west of Miss R. including New Orleans) to
  Spain. Beginning of empresario experiment

    - Now, Natchitoches is Spanish! This is a game changer for Spanish Texas.

    - So, from 1762-1800, west Louisiana was Spanish

    - Now, there isn't a reason to fortify Los Adaes; new frontier is along
      Mississippi River.

        - specifically, british west florida border (which extended to the
          mississippi

    - Missions are "secularized" (turned into churches instead of training
      academies)

    - Empresario experiment: make the people living in Spanish Louisiana
      naturalized Spanish citizens

        - Try to let in people who you think will be good citizens and develop
          a stake in maintaining the Spanish state

        - Only taking place in Spanish Louisiana

        - This model will be used later in Texas in the 1820s

- 1763: 1st treaty of paris (ending french and indian war)

    - Spanish reacts by establishing military government to govern New Spain's
      northern frontier (called the Interior Provinces)

    - Interior provinces sends troops where they're needed and defeats some
      uprisings and expeditions

    - King George's proclamation ban British colonoists from settling on lands
      west of the Appalachians and east of Mississippi to reserve area for
      Indians, Angers colonists.

- 1762-71: 2 missions est. at present-day Montell and Camp Wood, collectively
  known as El Canon. Last effort to Christianize Apaches in Texas. Abandoned in
  1771.

The big flip: American Revolution.

From 1763-1783: Britain is the enemy. 1783 onward, the US is the enemy

- 1766: in the wake of french succession, Marquies de Rubi examines northern
  fronteir from Sonora to LA. Recommended fallback to defensible line.

- 1772: Royal Regulation of 1772. San Antonio becomes capital of TX in 1773,
  replacing Los Adaes. 500 persons in East Texas uprooted.

    - These people move to found Bucareli, then later move back to Nacadoches.

- 1774: Bucareli founded on Trinity River. Nacogdoches founded in 1779 as a
  civil settlement. Spanish troops return to E texas in 1795, at the time of
  the treaty of San Lorenzo w/ US.

- 1776: Interior Provinces founded

- 1779: Spain declares war against Britain. American Revolution has begun,
  Spain wants Florida back. Enters was as an ally of France, not the American
  colonists. Spain fights Britain along the Miss. R and in West florida

- 1782: Mission system ending in TX. Church-state no longer share authority for
  administering TX .State (i.e. military) only authority. Crown in process of
  reducing clerical power.

- 1783: 2nd treaty of Paris marks birth of US. new threat on the frontier

    - Americans start putting pressure on the Miss. R. and start heading
      towards Texas

    - These people were called Filibusters (i.e. pirate, buckaneer, adventurer)

- 1795: Spain and US sign Treaty of San Lorenzo (Pickney's Treaty)

- 1798: Moses Austin founds Potosi. Establishes precedent for Anglo immigration
  to TX in 1820s

- 1800: under secret treaty, LA is returned to France (Napolean Bonaparte)

    - Philip Nolan, first US filibuster, killed by Spanish Troops near
      present-day Waco

    - Fairly soon after this, Napolean topples the Spanish government

    - Napolean didn't want to establish a colony in NA, so he just dumped
      it on America (Louisiana Purchase)

- 1803: LA purchase by Thomas Jefferson for $15M. Western boundary unclear.

    - Spanish troups buildup on border

- 1806: Neutral Ground Agreement

    - Created a no-man's land between Sabine and Red River/Calcasieu river

    - Became home to outlaws and fugitives

- 1808: Napolean places his brother on spanish thrown causing uproar in New
  Spain over who should hold power

    - This triggered a boiling over of the resentment between creoles and
      peninsulars (they wanted it to be a bloodless coup)

    - There was an exile government ruling in the name of Ferdinand 7 (the
      legit king of Spain)

- 1810: Mexican War of Indepenence begins on Sept. 16 in village of Dolores

    - Father Hidalgo ran a parish there

    - Hidalgo warned he was about to be arrested (execution implied)

    - Called his parishoners together (mostly mixed race Mexicans) and called
      them to revolt

    - Hidalgo found himself the leader of a giant peasant army

    - Eventually he is executed

- 1811: Govt. of San Antonio overthrown in Jan by local insurgents supporting
  Hidalgo

- 1812-13: Gutierrez-Magee expedition

    - Gutierrez and Magee team up (with unofficial help from US) and enter
      Texas from Louisiana (up to 1400 fighters)

    - Expedition breaks down, ended by Arredondo's attack at Medina

    - New Spanish Constitution of 1812

        - Now, king shares power with parliament!

        - (actually, when Ferdinand gets back in power, he says "nah, don't
          want that")

        - Ferdinand's flip causes a lot of colonies to break away from Spain

- 1813: Gen. Joaquin de Arredondo defeats Republican Army of the North at the
  Medina River

    - something like 1000 casualties

- 1814: Ferdinand 7 returns to Spanish thrown after defeat of Napolean.
  Abolishes constituteion and restores absolute monarchy

    - Military revolt

- 1816: Embers of MX independence movement -- Jose Herrera creates govt on
  Galveston Island and proclaims it part of an independent Mexico

- 1819: Adams-Onis Treaty

    - 1st long expedition. 2nd Long expedition in 1820

    - Spain gives up Florida

    - *This forms our present eastern boundary*

    - *Also serves as justification for Republic of Texas claiming so much
      land at independence*
