# GOV 312 Lecture -- 9.13.16

## Review: Texas Revolution

- Result of multiple causes

- Winning the war was far from inevitable

- Texas army resisted civilian control and threatened to topple the elected
  government of the Texas Republic

    - March 1836, temp civilian government is elected. It kinda sucks.

    - President-elect Burnett runs away to Galveston with what remains of the
      government, sped up the inauguration of Sam Houston

    - Houston tricks the Texas Army's self-appointed leader, Felix Huston

The major accomplishment of the Texas Republic is that it was lucky to survive!
All sorts of reasons why it should have fallen apart.

## Jumping back in to Revolution

### 1835

October 2 -- Battle of Gonzales

Oct 7 -- Gen Gos and Col Ugartechea in San Antonio

Oct 12 -- Army of the people starts for San Antonio ("Siege of San Antonio")

    - Just kinda sat outside and waited around.

    - Late november, they decide they should go home.

        - One guy just decides to run in, people join him, somehow they
          actually win

Oct 15 -- Consultation meets at Columbia and organizes "Permanent Council"

    - (lasted for about two weeks)

Nov 3 -- Mexican State of Texas established at San Felipe. Henry Smith elected
        governor along w/ "General Council" (2nd temp govt)

    - Smith just didn't play well with others

    - No one agreed; tried to send an expedition to Matamoros but it didn't
      happen

    - Smith tried to fire the General Council; Council impeaches Smith; Smith
      says "you can't do that". Pretty much just a flop.

    - Sets up next meeting @ Washington on the Brazos (only constructive thing
      they managed to do)

Dec 5 -- After long seige, Ben Milam leads 300 men into San Antonio

    - Milam dies, but the seige is successful

Dec 10 -- Cos surrenders and is allowed to leave Texas with his men (Rio Grande
used as TX boundary for the first time)

Dec 13 -- General Council calls for new convention to meet at Washington in
March '36 to draft a constitution for a new govt

    - Will eventually finally give Houston control over the army of the people,
      because right now he doesn't have any command power and nobody was
      listening to him.

    - by the time he takes over the army, most ppl who weren't listening to him
      had already died

Dec 22 -- Soliders at Goliad unofficially declare Texas independence

    - Army thought they were running the show

### 1836

January -- Santa Anna arrives in Saltillo with 6000 men prepared to take back
            Texas

        - San Antonio stripped of men and supplies for Matamoros expedition.
          Houston sends Bowie and 25 men to destroy the town's fortifications
          and retreat to Gonzales

            - This was the Alamo

            - Fannin's troops could have made a difference, but he was just
              flip flopping around in Goliad and didn't do anything

        - When Santa Anna arrives at San Antonio, heavy artillery was still 2
          weeks behind

        - He storms the alamo with ladders, causes a lot of Mexican casualties

February 1 -- Delegates elected to march convention

Februrary 3 - Travis with 29 men arrive in San Antonio to support Bowie

Feb 8 -- Crockett, James Bonham arrive in San Antonio

Feb 23 -- Vanguard of Santa Anna's army arrives in San Antonio

Feb 24 -- Travis appeals for help in famous letter

    - 13 days in siege of Alamo

Mar 2 - Declaration of Independence adopted at Washington on the Brazos

    - Wrote it in 2 weeks (basically copied a lot from the US)

Mar 3 - Last messenger leaves Alamo

Mar 6 - Santa Anna takes Alamo after 13 day siege

Mar 11 -- Houston arrives in Gonzales, burns town, and retreats 2 days later

    - This was when he realized that Travis' letter wasn't a lie

    - Begins the mass running away from the Mexican Army

    - Houston didn't tell anybody why he was doing this

        - Best theory: he was waiting for a critical encounter to turn the tide
          of the war

    - about 600 troops under Houston; he found a safe place along the Brazos
      (empty plantation) and taught them military discipline and sent out
      scouts

        - Opportunity arises when Santa Anna, missing Burnet, doesn't rejoing
          immediately with the army and rests at San Jacinto

    - US Army waiting in LA on Sabine River

Mar 16 -- Constitution adopted, David Burnet elected interim President

Mar 19 -- James Fannin and his army of 500 surrounded outside Goliad near
        Coleto Creek

    - Houston tells him to retreat to Victoria. Fannin delays, then it's too
      late. He gets executed at Goliad

April 15 -- 600 Mexican troops under Santa Anna arrives in Harrisburg (today
Houston) and tries to capture rebel leaders (i.e. Burnet and company)

April 21 -- Battle of San Jacinto

    - Texas attacks in the afternoon, battle lasts about 18 minutes

    - 9 texans died, a whole lot more Mexicans died

    - Santa Anna dressed up like a common soldier, flew under the radar

    - was turned in by his own soldiers

    - Texans decide not to kill him, he is let go

May 14 -- Treaty of Velasco signed with Santa Anna

Mexican army hadn't been paid and couldn't get supplies, so they couldn't do a
whole lot. Army leaves and just doesn't come back.

Nobody knew if the war was actually over! Nobody knew if the army would come
back.

July 20 -- Austin, returned from US, agrees to run for President

    - Nobody really cared... he came back of his own volition

July 23 -- President Burnet announces elections for 1st Monday in September

September 5 -- Houston beats Austin for President 5119 to 587

    - Austin came in 3rd, behind Smith who had dropped out of the race!

October 22 -- Houston inaugrurated at Columbia, appoints "unity" cabinet

    - voted on annexation by the US (more than 95% in favor)

    - Turned out that we had to be a republic for 10 years

## Revolution Overview

- Texas won independence due mainly to geography, miscalculation by the enemy,
  aid from the US, just enough volunteering, and good luck

- Many Tejanos supported the overthrow of Santa Anna's govt. Few favored Texas
  Indpeendence

- Teh battle of the Alamo was far more significant symbolically than militarily

- Most Texans didn't know if the war of independence was over after the Battle
  of San Jacinto

- The Texas Army threatened to take over the Texas govt in teh summer of '36,
  which is why Acting president Burnet speeded up the inaguration of Sam
  Houston

- Most Texans wanted to be annexed by the US. It was the US that kept Texas
  waiting for almost 10 years

    - Why? Slavery. Approaching the boundary of the civil war, didn't know if
      Texas would be split up into multiple slave states. It might really upset
      the balance in favor of the slave state

    - Also, annexing Texas would be an act of war against Mexico

    - There was a presidental election going on, and Texas was a hot issue. Van
      Buren just didn't want to deal with it
