# GOV 312 Lecture -- 9.16.16

## Overview: Texas Republic 1836-1845

1. Texas Republic was lucky to survive

    - Economy was mostly based on barter! Currency was so inflated, the Texas
      dollar lost almost all of its value.

    - The other big accomplishment: we actually grew a population inside of
      Texas. By the end of the Republic in 1845, population has about tripled.

2. Sam Houston and Mirabeau Lamar represented opposite poles of opinion during
   the Republic period

    - Both agreed that the population should grow, but they disagreed on pretty
      much everything else

    - They hated each other

    - i.e. Houston wanted to try and coexist with the native populations,
      particularly the Cherokees. Lamar just wanted to drive them out.

    - Mirabeau wanted to stay independent and rival the US, expanding to the
      Pacific. Houston was ready to annex ASAP.

    - Most population was concentrated in eastern, central Texas. Lamar's
      supporters were on the western border of the populated area (today Travis
      county!) on the frontier. Houston's supporters were more concentrated in
      the east.

3. The American annexation of Texas by the US was controversial everywhere
   except inside Texas

    - Biggest issue was slavery. Jackson definitely wanted to annex Texas, but
      it was too big of an issue that came up as he was leaving office. He
      basically punted.

    - Ended up taking 10 years

## Timeline: The Texas Republic

### First Houston administration (Oct. '36 - Dec. '38)

Immediate problems facing the Republic:

- Restless army

- Financial difficulties

- Indian raids

- Lack of diplomatic recognition

    - Even though we got recognition, we still couldn't borrow money-- nobody
      would lend us any!

- Location of capital

    - Between Houston and today-Austin (Waterloo)

Houston announces his candidacy for president 11 days before the election and
wins by a landslide. People loved him.

A big reason we wanted to be recognized by other nations was so that we could
ask for money from them!

Started out 1.5M in debt, when annexed we were more than 10M in debt

### 1836

December

- Congress creates TX Railroad, Navigation, and Banking Co.

    - Never got off the ground due to distrust of banks

    - Panic of 1837 happened pretty soon, couldn't get US investors

- Congress chooses Houston as a capital until 1840

- Tariff Act passed by Congress

    - Somewhat ironic, since we were marching on the customs house when we were
      part of Mexico. This was really the only hard currency we could get,
      though.

- Texas Boundary Act

    - Gives Texas the bizarrely large borders of the republic

- Austin dies

    - He was made Secretary of State by Houston, but it was a kind of
      "consolation prize"-- his time was pretty much over.

### 1837

January

- Snata Anna arrives in Washington DC to discuss diplomatic recognition of TX

March

- US officially recognizes Republic of Texas

April

- Bustamante again becomes Pres. of MX taking hard line towards TX

    - To Mexico, Texas had never left. They wouldn't recognize Texas'
      independence until after the Mexican-American war

- Capital moved from Columbia to Houston

August

- Texas formally requests annexation from the US (we get rejected about three
  weeks later)

### 1838

April

- Houston vetos bill recommneding capital be moved near La Grange. 2nd bill
  provides that permanent capital be named Austin.

October

- Houston withdraws request for US annexation

- TX militia, led by Rusk, attacks a force of Tejanos and Indians along the
  upper Trinity river

September

- Election! Houston can't run again, Tom Rusk would have been the most likely
  filler of Houston's shoes but he turned it down. Houston turned to two other
  people, and they both committed suicide (!).

- Lamar wins the election, Burnet is his VP

## Lamar Administration (Dec '38 - Dec '41)

Major issues:

1. Capital location

2. Diplomatic relations

3. Frontier defense

Lamar spends a lot of money we don't have to fight the Comanchees

Did set aside land for education

### 1839

April

- Waterloo selected as capital

May 

- Lamar tries to buy diplomatic recognition from Mexico

July

- Cherokee War

Sept

- France becomes 1st European country to recognize TX

    - The Pastry War: French want to sieze the customs house at Veracruz so
      that they could get back the money Mexico owed them

- Houston elected to House from San Augustine

October

- Government officials arrive in Austin
