# GOV 312L Lecture -- 9.20.16

## Announcements

- Study guide review on *Thursday*

- Test next Tuesday! (update your calendar!)

## Timeline: Lamar Administration (continued)

1839

- April: Waterloo selected as capital

- May: Lamar tries to buy diplomatic recognition from Mexico

    - That never worked out.

- July: Cherokee War

- Sept: France becomes first European country to recognize TX 

    - Britain is #2

  Houston elected to the Texas house from San Augustine

    - It looked like Mexico would never pay back their bills to France

- October: Government officials arrive in Austin

Britain wanted to block America's westward expansion by capturing New Orleans,
establishing British Louisiana. *This* was more of a major driving factor for
colonization than anything else. 

1840

- January: Republic of the Rio Grande declared w/ Laredo as capital

- March: Council House Fight in San Antonio

- September: Netherlands recognize Republic of Texas

- November: Great Britan recognizes TX, TX agrees to end African Slave Trade

1841

- June: Santa Fe Expedition

    - Pioneers are all captured by Mexican army

    - Released a year or so later when Houston comes back to power

    - Held as one of Lamar's greatest failures

- Sept

    - Houston defeats Burnet 7509-2574 in presidential election

    - Peters Colony bill passed. 2000 famlilies settled in NOrth Central TX
      .Empresario system reveived in 1841-44.

    - FR change d'affaires Alphonse de Saligny leaves Austin

    - Belgium recognizes republic of TX

    - Santa Anna replaces Bustamante as president of MX ,overthrown again in
      1841

### Dec 1841 - Dec 1844: Second Houston Administration

    - Foreign policy

    - Annexation 

    - Capital Location

March: MX army 2/1400 captures and loots SA, Refugio, Goliad. Santa Anna
servers  a notice re-conquest of TX is near

June: Congress assembles at Houston but without the archives. Congress passes
bills increasing TX military,but houston

September: MX Army returns to San Antonio with 1300-1400

November: Congress assembles at Washington on the brazos.

December: Archives war

    - Troops under Gen .Somervill sll occupy Laredo.

1843:

April -- Col. Jacob Snivlye and 150 men sent tontercept trade crossing TX and
on Santa Fe

June  Santa Anna offers TX a 10% peace treaty.

October: Pres. Tyler opens negotation for annexation

    - wanted to build a political base lso the election prorffo

1844:

TX and US sign treaty of annexation to maek TX a territory

May: Polk receives desmocratics presidentail nomination

June: US Senate rejects treaty signed in April by Tyler

Gen Woll gives Houston notice that MX hostilities will be renewed. US Army
under Taylor at Fort Jessup, LA.

Sept: Anson Jones elected presidnt over Burleson 

November: james polk defeats Henry Clay to be elected US President.

    - Polk changes the conversation!

1845:

Congress passes joint resoluion r providing for annexation. 27-25 in SEnate,
house 120=98

May:

Jones calls Congress to meet on June 16 and convention to meetin in Austin on
July 4th. Mexico finally ofers, unofficially to recognize Texas

July : convention writes state constititution and accepts statse treaty with 1
neage vote

... falling asleep during these notes, need to go over back over this stuff!!!

Main points

1. Republic's biggest accomplishment: survival

2. Sam Houston and Mirabeau Lamar were the two big polar figures

3. Houston's diplomacy, Tyler's ambitions, the British threat, and the election
   of Polk are responsible for annexation in 1845

   4. Although Texas annexation passed the US senate by one vote, the final
      terms were exceedingly generous, far more than were necessary to win
      Texas approval
