# GOV 312 Lecture -- 9.29.16

## Early Statehood

1. The mexican war was a war of conquest and it was seen by many as a
   plot to enlarge slavery's domain

   - US pretty much undoubtedly started it.

   - Very controversial in the US

2. The Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Act were futile efforts to
   resolve the slavery issue

   - The Whig party is destroyed by the Kansas-Nebraska act

3. The new Republican Party was viewed by most Texans and other southerners as
   a thread to the existence of slavery

   - United around the principle of "no slavery"

## Timeline

- First state constitution was written in 1845

### War with Mexico

- 1845

    - March 6: MX ambassador to US breaks diplomatic relations over joint resolutoin
      annexing TX, but MX does not declare war

    - August: US troops under Gen. Zachary Taylor to establish camp at the
      mouth of the Nueces River

    - November: John Slidell sent as American negotator to buy California and
      New Mexico

    - March (1846): Polk orders Taylor to move his troops to Rio Grande

        - Deliberate provocation of Mexico

- 1846

    - April 12: Mexico demands US withdraw to Nueces within 24 hours or be attacked

    - April 23: Mexico declares war against the US and crosses Rio Grande the
      following day, defeating small contingent of US troops

    - May 13: Congress declares war after Taylor defeats Mexican Army at Palo
      Alto and Resaca de la Palma

        - "American blood was shed on American soil"

        - Abraham Lincoln (then senator) was not happy about this and picked up
          on the deception, but he was laughed at.

    - September 25: Gen. Taylor takes possession of Monterrey

    - US strength was in weaponry. Mexico was using surplus from the war of
      1812.

    - Fierce fighting

    - December: US troops under Gen. Kearny occupy Santa Fe

    - December: Taylor defeats Santa Anna at Buena Vista. End of northern campaign

- 1847

    - Mexico City captured by US army under Gen. Winfield Scott

- 1848

    - Feb 2: Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends the war with Mexico

    - TX attempts to organize "County of Santa Fe"; four counties organized

    - November: TX participates in first US presidential election

        - Texas voted for Louis Cass instead of Taylor

        - Anglo heratige is Jacksonian Democrat

            - States rights, anti-big bank, pro-slavery, anti-big-govt

    - new republican party

        - No slavery in the territories

    - Missouri compromise

        - Dividing line on 36 30

        - No slavery north

    - Popular soverignty

        - Each territory would decide for itself

    - Dred Scott position

        - Slavery in all the territories

- 1850

    - June: Nashville convention

        - Meeting of Southern states regarding the frontierland

        - How is it organized? Slavery?

    - September: Compromise of 1850. Last of 5 bills signed by President
      Fillmore

        1. organization of Utah as a territory

            - No mention of slavery

        2. New Mexico bill ***(gives us our modern border)***

        3. California statehood act

            - full of people because they found gold

        4. Fugitive slave law

            - Suddenly radicalized many northerners

                - You had to be an accomplice to not return slaves

            - Sparked the writing of Uncle Tom's cabin

        5. Abolition of the slave *trade* in Washington D.C.

- 1851

    - Whig party makes formal apperaance in TX by supporting gubernatorial
      candidacy of B.H. Epperson (who loses to Peter Bell).

- 1852

    - Houston nominated for President by state Dem party. Pierce elected. First
      railroad track laid between Harrisburg and Richmond

        - Most railways were completed after the civil war, not before

        - Kansas-Nebraska and a bad attempt to annex Cuba from Spain marked
          Pierce's presidency as mostly a flop

- 1854

    - Kansas-Nebraska act

        - Missouri compromise was repealed in order to win the Southern vote
          for the transcontenintal railroad running through the north.

        - Sam Houston objected, didn't vote because it infringed on the rights
          of the native Americans

        - Really big game changer

        - Whig party disintegrating. Know-Nothing (American) party elects
          government officials in San Antonio, Galvston, Austin. K-N's in
          decline by '56.

        - 1st anti-liquor law passed permitting counties to outlaw saloons by
          majority vote (declared unconstitutional and never enacted).
          Beginning of temperance movement in TX.

        - Result: almost a rehearsal for the civil war. "Bleeding Kansas"
