# GOV 312 Lecture -- 9.8.16

## Overview

Mexican Texas (1821-1835)

1. Anglo-Americans came to Mexican Texas mostly for economic and not 
   political reasons

    - Panic of 1819 in the US (collapse of real estate market) drove many
      people to Texas (land was 1/10th the cost in the US)

    - Still felt like they were US citizens even though they had become
      naturalized Mexican citizens

2. Mexico encouraged immigration from the US but was alarmed at the rate of
   immigration and ambivalent towards American-style slavery

3. Tensions between Texas and the Mexican government increased significantly in
   the early 1830s but war was not inevitable

    - Mexican govt began trying to put down the "rebellious" Texans, causing
      the Texas "revolution"

## Timeline

1833 - 
    (March) Capital of Coahuila and Texas moved to Monclova

    (April) 2nd Anglo convention held at San Felipe

    (Summer) Austin sent to Mexico City to present grievances and proposed
    state constitution to acting president Gomez Farias

    (July-Dec) Gomez Farias and Austin reach agreement on most isues except
    separate statehood for Texas

    (Oct) Austin letter ayuntamiento in San Antonio causes his arrest in
    Saltillo in Jan '34 on his way back to Texas

        - He wasn't happy with Farias plan, so he draws up these plans on his
          own to make Texas a Mexican state.

        - Local leaders in San Antonio don't like it, they alert Farias and
          arrest Austin at Saltillo

        - Sam Houston said: "Austin broke into jail." (aka he was asking for
          it)

        - Released after about a year of jail

            - He was kinda bummed out nobody revolted because of his arrest

            - ended up dying in his 40s, later on Houston decided to name a
              place after him --> here we are in Austin

1834 - 
    Juan almonte tours TX in spring and summer to assess situation for Farias
    Pursuant to Gomez Farias - Austin agreement, state government relaxes
    earlier restrictions

    (April) Santa Anna resumes reins of power from Gomez Farias and suspends
    Constitution of 1824

        - Replaces constitution with "the seven laws"

        - Santa Anna "the bad guy" appears

    (May) Santa Anna dismisses Contress. Coahuila-Texas Legislature passes resolution
    declaring all of Santa Anna's laws illegal until Congress is again free

    (July) Rival state govt set up in Saltillo

        - This is *not* the Texas revolution-- this is a whole year beforehand

        - Federalist revolt, strongest in states that are furthest from the
          capital (they had the most autonomy under the constitution of 1824)

        - Lots of different Mexican states are a part of this revolt

        - Santa Anna sends an army to put this down, encourages a separtist
          movement specifically in Texas

            - Other parts of Mexico just really wanted Santa Anna out of
              there-- didn't want out from Mexico itself

        - Some ethnocentric attitudes were fueled by this event-- anglos though
          that Mexico couldn't govern itself

    (July) Juan Seguin, police chief of Bexar, endorses proposal to hold
    convention at Bexar in November 1934

1835 -
    Mexican policy towards Texas turns hostile

    (January) Snata Anna sends troops to Anahuac

    (March) MX govt orders drastic reduction in size of state militias

    (March-April) State Leg of C-T passes 2 laws authorizing the governon to
    meet "public emergency" by selling 1000s of leagues of public land

        - At this point, this is open revolt to the Mexican govt

    (April) Santa Anna personally leads 4000 troops to put down revolt in state
    of Zacatecas

        - He trashes the capital of that state (serves as a warning)

        - Agustin Viesca inaugurated governor of C-T; believes in defying Santa
          Anna

            - He's arrested in June 1835, then escapes

            - Friend of federalism... not so much friend of anglos

        - Independence is pretty much exclusively an anglo idea.

    (May) MX Congress announces it has the power to rewrite constitution of
          1824. Martin Perfecto de Cos leads army towards Monclova. Viesca 
          captured by Cos on Jun 8

    (June) Gen. Cos sends letter to Anahuac garrison commander telling him
    reinforcements on way. Letter intercepted at San Felipe on June 21 2nd
    Battle of Anahuac. W. B. Travis and 30-50 march on Anahuac garrison and 
    obtain surrender

        - This seriously ticks off Gen. Cos

    (July) Committees of settlers condemn Travis. Cos orders Travis and 5
    others turned over for military trial

        - This really was the turning point. Cos could have backed down, but he
          doubled down on wanting to kill Travis et. al. This was the trigger
          point.

    (Aug) Call for consultation in Oct to meet at Columbia

    (Sept) Gen. Cos sets out from Matamoros for San Antonio w/ 500 men. Austin,
    now back in Texas, declares support for Consultation called for October

        - Anglos are completely disorganized, and the Mexican army is marching
          towards them. Decisions are being made from a point-to-point basis

        - Cos ends up being defeated!

    (Oct) Santa Anna abolishes constitution of 1824, repeals reforms of 1834.
    Congress dissolves state legislatures and brings state governors directly
    under presidential control

## Reasons for the Revolution

1. Importance of slavery to Anglo slave owners (more important)

2. Behavior of Santa Anna (more important)

3. "Clash of two cultures" (assumption of Anglo superiority) (more important)

4. Merchants who didn't want to pay customs duties (more important)

5. Land speculators were afraid the govt would cancel their land purchases

Similarities between TX and American revolution

- Resistance to "unfair taxes" and stationing of soldiers in civilian
  population

- Resistance to crackdown by national gov't and centrailzed authority

## Back to Timeline (Now at Texas Revolution)

Overview (4 stages)

    1. Siege of San Antonio

        - Army of the People lay siege to Gen. Cos

        - Somehow, they invade San Antonio with pretty much just rifles and
          knives and win.

    2. Santa Anna jumps in

        - Alamo

            Not much of a strategic location... kind of an accident

            Bowie was sent to move supplies away from there, but he and Travis
            and Crockett just decide to stay here.

        - Battle of Goliad

            Nobody has much good to say about Fannin (gen in charge of Anglos)

    3. San Jacinto

        - Completely unexpected, Sam Houston was actually running away at the
          time

        - Captured Santa Anna, ends the war

    4. Texas army tried to take over the temporary Texas Republic after the end
       of the war

        - Almost got away with it, but Burnett rushes the inaguration of Sam
          Houston to the presidency and Houston manages to trick them

Late 1835 -
    October 2: Battle of Gonzales

        - Settlers wouldn't give the borrowed cannon back

        - "Come and take it" flag

        - Mexican troops decide not to push, return to San Antonio

    October 7: Gen.Cos and Col. Ugartechea in San Antonio

    October 12: "Army of the People" starts for San Antonio

        300 to 600 volunteers, led by Austin (not really a great idea, Austin
        had no military experience)

    October 15: Consultation meets at Columbia and organizes "permanent
    council"

    November 3: Mexican State of Texas established at San Felipe. Henry Smith
    elected governon along with "general council"

## Key points of Texas Revolution

1. Texas Revolution was teh result of multiple causes (see above)

2. Winning the independence movement was not inevitable at all

3. Texas army resisted civilan control and threatened to topple the civilian
   govt
