EE 422C Lecture -- 9.10.15
==========================

Project 2 is published, due Monday. Code review on Wednesday.

Interfaces
----------
Relatedness of types
    Ex: Circle, Rectangle, Triangle classes
    Each shape has a perimeter and area method, but each calculates it differently.
Interface: A list of methods that a class can implement.
    Contrast with inheritence, which is an is-a relationship with code sharing
    interfaces give you an is-a relationship *without* code sharing
        A Rectangle object can be treated as a Shape
    You know that the object has certain methods, and guarantee that to the client
        through the interface.
    
    public interface Shape {
        // These are called abstract methods
        public double area();
        public double perimeter;
    }
    public class Circle implements Shape {
        private double radius;
    
        public double area() {
            return Math.PI * radius * radius;
        }

        public double perimeter() {
            return Math.PI * radius * 2; 
        }
    }

 
    Interfaces are for the benefit of the client, not really the class. 
    Polymorphism -- abstracting away from a specific class in higher-level functions.
    public static void printInfo(Shape a) {
        System.out.println("The shape: " + a);
        System.out.println("area : " + a.area());
        System.out.println("perimeter : " + a.perimeter());
    }

    Can create arrays with interfaces!

    Circle circ = new Circle(12.0);
    Rectangle rect = new Rectangle(4,7);
    Triangle tri = new Triangle(5,12,13);
    printInfo(circ);
    printInfo(tri);
    printInfo(rect);
    Shape[] shapes = [tri, circ, rect};

    Note: @Override is used to alert the programmer that a supertype method has to be 
            overridden.
Linked List
-----------
An object reference is a variable that stores the address of an object.
    A reference can also be called a pointer.
A linear collection of self-referential objects, called nodes, connected by links.
Advantages: dynamic data structure and non-continuous by nature (don't have to sit
    next to each other in memory)

public class Node {
    private Object myData;
    private Node myNext;

    public Node (Object data, Node next) {
        myData = data; myNext = next;
    } 
}
