EE 422C Lecture -- 9.22.15
==========================

Agenda for today
	Project 3 summary
		Pair programming
		Java data structures, recursion
	Iterators
	Java collections, continued
	Reference semantics -- review

Iterators
	ArrayList is a part of the Java Collections Framework
	Collection is an interface, not a class, that specifies the basic
		operation that every collection should have.
	Some collections don't have a defined order (Sets, Maps, Graphs)
	How to access all the items in a Collection with no specified order?
	
	Iterator interface
		it is a "one shot" object
		designed to go through all the elements of a Collection once.

		specifies three functions
			boolean hasNext() // returns true if this iteration has more elements
			E next() // returns the next element in this iteration
			void remove() // remove from the underlying collection the last element
						  // returned by the iterator. You can only call remove() once for 
						  // each call to next()

	ArrayList<String> names = new ArrayList<String>();
	Iterator<String> it = names.iterator()
	// Prints out all contents of names
	while (it.hasNext() ) {
		System.out.println(it.next());
	}

	If you modify a collection while it is being iterated through, the next call to
	next() or remove() will throw an exception.

	ListIterator
		an interface that is the extension of the iterator interface
		has additional methods.
			add(E e)
			boolean hasNext()
			boolean hasPrevious()
			E next()
			int nextIndex()
			E previous()
			int previousIndex()
			void remove()
			void set(E e)

	exercise:
		Write a method rarest that accpeta a map whose keys ar estring and whose values are 
		intergers as a parameter and return the integer value that occurs the fewest times 
		in the map. If there is a tie, remove the smaller integer value. if the map is empty,
		throw an exception.

	Key value pairs: <String, Integer>

