# BME 370 Lecture -- 8.29.16

Will's our TA! Send him an email to set up meeting times.

Reading assignment:

    - Ch.1 Case study for Wednesday

    - Chapter 2 for Wednesday

Assignment:

    - Redesign 1: Needs identification (Sept. 9, next Friday)

What users/stakeholders exist for the project? Who can you contact?

## Problem Definition

- Market

    - Who are the customers? Who are the stakeholders?

    - Regulatory environment?

- Core Competencies

    - Strengths/weaknesses of the team

- Competition

    - What other companies are in this field?

    - What are their resources?

- Customer Needs

    - Match needs & product

    - Identify population with similar needs

## Gathering Customer Needs

Several approaches:

    - Questionnaires

    - Focus groups

    - Observations

Think beyond the patient -- some needs require input from a
variety of parties.

    - Purchasers

    - Insurance companies

    - Doctors

    - Technicians

Interview Tips

    - "Articulated Use": walk me through a usage cycle as a user.

        - Ask questions to illuminate context, familiarity with 
          the device, likes and dislikes

        - Be prepared to go with the flow

    - Prepare your list of questions, let the other person define
      how much time they have

Translate customer's voice into a product need statement

    - Change a negative to a positive

        - i.e. "device moves around too much" => "device must stay in place"

    - Talk about *what* the product must do, *not how*

    - Rate importance

Customer needs form (form and examples on Canvas)

Action Items:

    - Schedule meeting with Will

    - Schedule customer interviews

Notebook:

    - Will serve as a record of individual contribution

    - Will serve as a record of invention

    - Imagine that your notebook is being read out in court

    - Don't write about other team members. Not a diary.

    - Entries in blue or black ink and should be dated and signed

    - No skipped pages

    - Expected entries are approximagely 200-500 words per week

    - Write directly into notebook, don't transcribe later

    - Must have signed witness (the TA)

    - Draw a single line through deleted content

Check slideshow for possible topics to put down in notebook
