# BME 370 Lecture -- 9.2.16

## Assignment: Needs Identification

    - Problem Statement

    - Needs Statement

    - Prioritized Needs Criteria

    - Appendix with results from needs gathering activities

## From last time: Needs Filtering

- Filter down from large pool of needs to about 10 or so

    - Once you've gotten down to this smaller list, need to do in-depth
      research and feasibility

- Balance between feasiblity, impact, and risk

    - Blue sky needs: paradigm-shifting solutions that change upstream
      problems.

    - Incremental needs: Fix smaller problems

    - Mixed needs zone: where we tend to live most of the time.

- Needs weighting done by the design team, not the customer.

    - May not necessarily align with the opinions of the customer; also has to
      be weighted by your own observations

    - Table example: Weight customer assessments in order to assist with
      rankings. The table is an example of what should be in the assignment
      appendix.

- Needs statement isn't a set-in-stone thing, but rather a snapshot of your
  current thinking

    - This information will be updated and then included in the final report

    - Dr. Suggs will be comparing the updated information with the original

## Translating customer needs to engineering specifications

- Setting a design target

- Engineering specifications are *quantitative*. You've gotta ask the numbers
  questions, whether or not they're uncomfortable.

- QFD (Quality Function Deployment)

    - A good specification has a *number* and a *value*

    - We have to make a "House of Quality"

    - http://gqdcapture.com or just download Dr. Suggs Excel template
