# EE 461S Lecture -- 10.18.16

## Announcements

- Exam 1 grades will be up Thursday or Friday

    - Should sign up on GradeScope

- VM Project due next week

Today's class

- Paging can be slow... use h/w assistance with translation lookaside buffer
  (TLB)

    - In architectures other than x86, OS manages TLB

- Page replacement algorithm

    - FIFO

    - Random choice

    - LRU

    - Approx. of LRU (Clock algorithm)

    - Others not covered in this class

        - Second chance

        - Gclock (global clock)

        - WS clock

        - Most of these are derivations of the clock algorithm

- If time, introduce threads

## Questions about VM Project

Swap

- swap filesystem is a block system, not a partition system

- Call `block_write` and `block_read` to access a block

- Blocks are a size of 512 bytes

    - 8 blocks make up one page

- Will always be allocating pages in contiguous 8 blocks

Frame allocator

- `palloc_get_page` should be "hijacked" so that you keep track of frames

- Example code:

    ```
        frame_init() {
            while(palloc_get_page(PAL_USER)) {
                ... (add frame to FT)
            }
        }
    ```

    - Take up all the user pool frames so that the frame table can dish them
      out. Then, replace all calls to `palloc_get_page` with a call to the
      frame table structure

Allowing stack growth

- ***Allow up to 32 bytes above the stack pointer***

    - Edge cases: don't overrun into the heap. Give an invalid error, pagefault
      handler should exit with -1

    - Set a stack capacity limit of 8MB (might have to tweak this value a bit)

Lazy Loading

- Note to self: save the total page size of the executable during load time so
  you know whether or not an access is valid in the code segment

You don't have to pass any of the mmap-\*\* tests (since we aren't doing memory
mapped files)

    - Normally you'd have to add another syscall `mmap` and implement it

## Paging is Slow: Use TLB

Overhead is incurred on each memory access

- All memory addresses a program generates are virtual addresses

    - Code

    - Data

    - Stack

- We have to perform the translation process on every access, even if it's
  performed in hardware. This results in two actual memory accesses for every
  virtual memory address access.

In practice

- There's a cache of mappings from vpn to pfn that is stored in a hardware
  table called the Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)

    - There is only *one* TLB per processor

      ```
        TLB Entry:

         (key)          (8bit num)
        |_vpn__|__pfn__|__ASID__|___|
      ```

      Together, `vpn` and `ASID` form the key (i.e. location and process)

    - The TLB is a fully-associative cache (i.e. it's really fast)

        - Content addressable memory

        - Lookup occurs in constant time O(1)

        - A fully-associative cache performs a parallel search

        - Only reason it's not all over the place: it's hella expensive to
          build

- TLB Impact

    - Upwards of 99% hit. Almost completely mitigates the paging overhead

    - Tracking performance of code wrt memory accesses? Good indicator of poor
      memory performance is when the TLB hit ratio is low

    - TLB has a replacement algorithm to evict entries when the cache is full.
      In x86, we have no control over this algorithm

## Page Replacement Algorithms

Precondition: the frame table has no free entries remaining.

Frame Table Entry:

```
    |__thread*__|___page_addr_|_spte___A__V|

        A = accessed

        V = valid
```

Frame table should have 367 entries (since there are that many user pages in
the user pool

### Clock algorithm

At any point in time, the clock hand is pointing to a particular entry

- Ideally, we want to remove the frame that was least recently used

- Look at each entry's A bit and find the first one that hasnt' been accessed
  (A bit of 0). Evict that page.

- As you go along the clock, set A to 0

- If all entries were 1, you'll do a complete loop and evict the page you
  started at

Some possible enhancements:

- don't look through every single frame (i.e. don't do a global frame search)

    - Limit to the frames of the page-fault causing process

    - Called a "working set"

    - We aren't required to do this, just food for thought

## Threads

Process

- When a child is forked, the child is identical except for the pid

- child is considered a "heavyweight thread" since it carries all of the parent
  thread's context with it. downside: there is no communication or sharing
