# EE 461S Lecture -- 10.11.16

## Announcements

- Project 1 grades will be up this afternoon

- Exam 1 review session planned

    - tomorrow (look for announcement on Piazza) later in the evening

- Exam Prep

    - Go to book author's site (OSTEP) and course page, which has old exams

    - Each chapter has some practice problems at the end

        - Python scripts in the book are there for:

            - scheduling, FIFO, SJF, SCTF, RR, MLFQ

            - Lottery, memory management

## Agenda

Things *not on the exam* but relevant for Pintos project:

- TLB

- Page replacement algorithms

- Swapping

- Paging (2 level)

- Segmentation

## Paging

2 level paging system:

```
virtual address

|_PD no_|_Page no_|_offset_|
32                         0
```

In x86, there's a CR3 register that holds the address of the page directory
base register (PDBR).

- Page directory holds page directory entries (PDE):

    ```
        PDE:

        |_page table_|______| ---> ___Page_Table_
                                 | |            |
                                 | |            |
                          Page no| |            |
                                 | |------------|
                                 ->|  PFN |     | PTE
                                   |------------|
                                   |            |
                                   |            |
                                   --------------
    ```

- Important unit here is the page size == frame size

    - this is set by the `offset` value in the virtual address. If offset
      is of `k` bits, then page size = `2^k`.

Where do you save PDBR?

- When the process is running, it's stored in the register. When it's not
  running it needs to be in the page control block (or the thread control
  block)

In vm folder:

- vm.[ch]

    - Implementing virtual memory by keeping track of a supplemental page table

    - Each page table has 1024 entries

    - Add an `spt` to the `struct thread`

    - `vm_load_page` called from page fault handler

    - `spe` contents

        - What page does it correspond to?

        - Is it in memory, swap, or disk? If so, where?

        - Implemented as a hash table

- swap.[ch]

- frame.[ch]

Also implement a frame table.

- What does an FTE entry look like?

    - Free/not free

    - who this frame belongs to. Hook to the supplemental page table.

    - Access information

- What happens when you go through your frame table and realize there are no more free frames?

    - Use a clock algorithm to find out if all frames are taken up

        - Approximation of the least recently used (LRU) algo

## Swap

Both the filesystem and swap have the same speed.

Swap space is broken up into blocks called "swap slots"

- Swap slot is a continous, page-sized region of memory

4 MB swap disk, swap table will be 4 MB / page-size = 1024 entries

Swap table keeps track of all the free and allocated swap slots

## Program locality

Locality in both space and time is the motivating factor for lazy loading

## Page Replacement Algorithm

- Random

- LRU

- Clock (approximation of LRU)

How do you assess the performance of a page replacement algorithm?

- How does it compare to "optimal" page replacement?

    - Always replace the frame that will be used the furthest away in time

    - Hit ratio (number of hits over total accesses)
