# EE 461S Lecture -- 10.27.16

## Announcements

- Project 4: Threads and Scheduling

    - should be somewhat simpler than the previous two projects

    - We aren't implementing MLFQ or anything, it's just a basic scheduler

## Project 4 Overview

Components

1. Alarm Clock

2. Priority-based scheduling

3. Priority donation

2 and 3 are connected by *synchronization*

Synchronization:

- Locks

- condition variables

- Semaphores

All thread tests have *no* user programs.

### Alarm Clock

When `thread_create()` is called:

- the thread is put in the `THREAD_READY` state.

- Thread is added to the ready list

    - `t->allelem` adds the thread to the list of all threads ever created (the
      "all threads" list)

    - `t->elem` adds thread to ready list and sync list


`schedule()`

- transfers state to `THREAD_RUNNING`

- Takes the thread off the ready list

`thread_block()`

- Transfers state to `THREAD_BLOCK`

`thread_unblock()`

- Transfers state back to `THREAD_READY`

```
                schedule()                  thread_exit()
THREAD_READY --------------> THREAD_RUNNING ------------> THREAD_DYING
    ^       <---------------    ^
    |        thread_yield()     |
    |                           |
    |thread_unblock()           | thread_block()
    |                           |
    |<----- THREAD_BLOCKED<-----|

```

`timer_sleep` is a function that lets the OS sleep a thread for a certain
amount of real life time

- First order of business: Change the code for `timer_sleep`.

    - Should put the thread in a blocked state, not on the ready list

    - There's only one timer on the system, it's called 8254 timer chip

        - It's been pre-programmed to interrupt at 100 Hz; 100 ticks per
          second.

        - The interrupt is `TimerInterrupt` handler.

        - Every 10 ms is one tick

    - Time slice is *4 ticks*

    - Set thread in sleep-list and set its wakeup time

- Modify sleep so that it isn't a busy wait; rather, have a sleep list
  containing all threads that invoked `sleep`

Pintos keeps a global tick counter, which lets you have a relative time counter

Update `timer_interrupt()`:

- Wake up any thread whose wakeup time has arrived (i.e. you can wake up
  multiple threads

Focus on alarm first


### Priority Based Scheduling

Existing scheduler is a round robin with a time slice of 4 ticks

Priority levels are from 0-63, 0 being the lowest priority. 31 is default.

Modify `next_thread_to_run()` in `schedule()`

- Priority is already present in the thread and is being updated; we just
  have to use it.

### Synchronization

Locks, condition variables, and semaphores

We basically will just be focusing on implementing synchronization within the
sempaphores.

Every semaphore has a list of waiters

***Important***: chnage that must be made to `threads/synch.c`

Modify `list_pop_front` in `sema_up` function such that the list is ordered
with respect to priority.

- Means that `sema_up` will unblock the highest priority waiting

Classical problem in scheduling when using priority: Priority inversion

- solution: priority inheritence protocol, or priority donation protocol

    - A low priority task that is blocking a resource will "inherit" the
      priority of the higher priority task that was trying to access the
      resource as well. That way, the resource is freed up more quickly and
      removes the risk of priority inversion

    - The "effective priority" is increased, not the "base priority". After
      resource release, returns to base priority
