# EE 461S Lecture -- 12.1.16

## Announcements

- Surveys are electronic

- Old Final will be posted

    - Last q on old final is on log-structured file systems (partial)

- Grades

    - Project 5: skip `syn_*` tests if you're pressed for time. Don't worry
      about synchronization unless you have time.

## File Systems: Crash Recovery

- `fsck` is what we talked about last time

    - Tends to be slow

    - Amount you can recover is minimal

- Other option: journaling.

    - In Linux: ext3 and onward use journaling by default

    - macOS: HFS and HDFS use journaling

    - Windows: NTFS use journaling

    - Has three sub-categories:

        1. Data Journaling

        2. Metadata Journaling

            - Unordered (NTFS)

            - Ordered   (ext2 can do either)

### File System Check (`fsck`)

File system doesn't do anything to prepare itself for a crash.

Process:

1. Check for superblock integrity

2. Looks for free blocks

    - Checking for inconsistencies between the inode and the bitmaps (inode is
      always used as the master when resolving conflicts)

    - Analagous process used for data blocks

3. inode state

    - does it match the inode type? file, directory, or symlink

4. inode Links

    - inside the inode structure, there's a `link_count` property indicating
      how many times the file has been hard-linked

    - This stage is really time consuming

    - If there is a hard link with a bad link, it is put in lost+found

5. Bad blocks

6. Duplicate blocks

    - Two inodes both pointing to the same data block

    - Resolution: make copies

7. Directory Checks

    - simple checks to ensure `.` is the first, `..` is second, etc.

### Journaling

We want to record three things: inode (v2), bitmap (v2), and the datablock

```
-------------------------
| J |G0 |G1 |G2 |...|   |
-------------------------
  |      |
  |      V  single group
--|--------------------------
|S|B| i_map | d_map | blocks|               |
--|--------------------------
  |
  |
  V
  A Journal is the expression of what is intended
-------------------------
|Tx1 | Tx2 | ...        | list of transactions
-------------------------
        |
        |
        V
-------------------------
|TxB|  Iv2 Bv2 Db   |TxE|
-------------------------

transaction begin and end
and the *actual writes* for each item.

Basically writes everything two times:

```

#### v1.0 Journaling solution

1. Journal write

    - TxB

    - Iv2

    - Bv2

    - Db

    - TxE

2. Checkpoint

    - Write Iv2, Bv2, and Db to their actual locations

Problem: can still be interrupted.

#### v2.0 Journaling solution

1. Journal write: TxB, Iv2, Bv2, Db

    - Then, *wait for completion*. This serves as a barrier

2. Journal commit: TxE

    - Wait to complete

3. Checkpoint

How does recovery work on these systems?

- If there's a crash (or auto-triggered on reboot) and there are entries in the
  journal, replay the entries (called redo logging)

    - Possible redundant write cases, but they don't happen very often.

- The journal block is finite, written as a circular log

```
-------------------------------
|super journal|     | ...     |
|   block     |     |         |
-------------------------------

```

Enhancements to Journaling

- ext4 uses checksum at beginning and end of journal that are computed across
  the entire length of the journal

    - On recovery, make sure the internal writes in the journal were performed
      correctly-- match the checksum

- Separate data from metadata during journaling

    - Iv2 and Bv2 are metadata; depending on your definintion, directories are
      as well.

    - Data blocks are only written once, but metadata is journaled and then
      written

        - Ordering:

            1. Data write

            2. Journal write

            3. Journal commit

            4. checkpoint

            5. periodicaly free up space in the journal

### Log Structured File System (LFS)

- Want to maximize sequential disk activity

- All writes are sequential and are to new free areas
