# EE 461S Lecture -- 9.6.16

## Notes to self

- Make some example programs to figure out `exec` behavior

- What's the role of `exec` and `fork` in terms of the processes that are
  created?

## Announcements

- There's a class Piazza! Should probably get on that.

- Quiz 1 on Thursday

    - Covers lectures 1, 2, and 3

    - In the book, this is Ch. 3-5

    - Topics:

        - Fork

        - Exec

        - Wait

        - Pipe

        - Open, close, read, write

- Project 1 Tips

    - Commands to implement:

        - `jobs`

        - `fg`

        - `bg` (always preceded by a <Cntl-Z>)

            - run a process
        
            - interrupt it with cntrl-z
    
            - `bg` forks it to the background
        
        - `cd` (extra credit, but it's really useful)

## Signals

Another mechanism of inter-process communication, like a pipe.

Every process must respond to signals

    - To see all signals, `man 7 signal`

    - `kill -9 18028` (`-9` is `SIGKILL`)

The two signals you can't capture or ignore are `SIGKILL` and `SIGSTOP`

Other common signals are `SIGTERM`, `SIGHUP`, `SIGCHILD`, `SIGINT`

    - `kill -1 pid_apache` in a webserver example

        - Apache says, "hey this config file has changed. Let me reload it"

        - That's just the defined behavior for `SIGHUP`

Control-C issues a `SIGINT`

`man 2 kill` shows the docs for the `kill` syscall

`kill` is just the syscall to send signals... it doesn't actually have much to
do with killing a process

*Dangerous command warning*: `sudo kill -9 1` kills the init process and all
its child processes

### Process ID's: A Closer Look

Processes can be clumped into process groups

    - Each process has an id, and each group has an ID

```
          --> p1  pid 1234
          |
group <----
gpid=1756 |
          --> p2  pid 2756
```

```
kill(1234, -9) // (If the id is positive, it's interpreted as a pid)
kill(-1756, -9) // (If the id is negative, it's interpreted as a gpid)
```

## Limited Direct Execution (Ch.6)

OS runs applications (process)

    - Direct execution with no limits

    - Limited direct execution (using syscalls)

    - Limited direct execuction (syscalls + timer)

### Bootstrapping

What happens when you turn the power on your computer?

1. 
```
            ROM
            _______
            |      |
CMOS        |1.POST| (power on self test)
(powered by |      |
battery)    |2.BIOS|    Boot
            |  |   |    Device
            |  |   |    (RAM)
____        |  |   |    _____________________
|  |        |  |------->|3.bootstrap program| 
|  |        |      |    |4. loader          |  
|  |        |      |    |5. Operating System|  
----        |      |    ---------------------
settings    --------
```

```asm
; pseudocode
FIXED_LOC
    LD R1, =0
    LD R1, =length_of_loader_region
    read    Bootdisk, buff_address
loop    LD R3, [Buff_addr, R1] ; copy the entire block
        ST R3, [FIXED_DEST, R1]
    INCR R1
    BLE R1, R2, loop
    BR FIXED_DEST ; When done, start the OS
```

### Operating System with Direct Execution

    - Init

    - Create entry for program in pcblist

    - Allocate memory for program

    - Load program into memory

    - Set up program's stack

    - OS provides arguments (`argc` and `argv`) on the stack

    - Set stack pointer to the top

    - Clear registers, execute call to main()

    - *Program*: runs main()

    - *Program*: returns

    - Free memory of program

    - Remove program from pcblist

In this concept, OS doesn't have any control until the program returns. I/O is
managed by library calls, and there is no protection for sensitive areas of
memory (like overwriting the operating system!)

Clearly, we need to give the OS back some degree of control for protection,
I/O, etc.

### Operating System wiht Limited Execution using Syscalls

To implement protection: *Modes of Execution*

    - User mode (user programs)

    - Supervisor mode (OS)
        
        - All I/O and protected tasks are in the OS, accessible by system
          calls using software interrupt TRAPs

OS:

    - Initialize a trap table (at boot time)
    
        ```
        TrapVector      Handler
        -------------------------
        |   0       |           |
        |   1       |handler()  |
        |   2       |           |
        |   3       |           |
        -------------------------
        ```

    - pcblist, add process, setup stack

    - Return from Trap (analagous to "RTI")

        - In ARM, it pops 8 registers to preserve state

        - The OS sets the PC (program counter) to have the address of main()

    - At `return_from_trap`, OS pops the registers off of the stack and gives
      control over to `main()`
