# BME 370 Lecture -- 9.9.16

## Announcements

Needs identification -- pushed back to Monday

Define Design Targets -- due this coming Friday!

    - Propose an improvement from what you got

    - For redesign project, you have to start with what you were given

    - For design project, you can have a more blue-sky approach

    - Disease state fundamentals

    - Existing solutions and treatment options

    - Stakeholder analysis

    - Market analysis

    - Written report, no more than two pages

## Benchmarking and Research

At the end of this section, we want to have a well defined problem and
engineering targets that we can hit.

### Benchmarking

What is the state of the art?

Assessing competitive products (performance, cost, regulatory)

Background research:

- Topics (Book, Ch. 2.2-2.4)

    - Physiological basiss and current solutions

    - Market analysis

    - Stakeholder analysis

- Resources

    - Patents

    - Peer-reviewed literature

    - Funded research

    - Expert interviews

### Patents and Intellectual Property

IP is defined as products of the human intellect that has economic value

Types

- Patents, trademarks (designs, logos), copyrights (words), trade secrets

Patents

- Description of invention (disclosure)

- Grant monopoly to holder or assignee

- Assignee and inventor may be different

    - Assignee is usually a company

    - Inventor list cannot be modified

- 3 types: design, plant, utility

Why patents?

- encourage disclosure in return for proprietary control over one's
  intellectual property

- "Fully consistent with the academic mission of full and open communication of
  research results at the earliest feasible opportunity"

Literature Review

- Company white papers (watch out! Not peer-reviewed!!!)

- Peer-reviewed literature

- Standards

- Assume all websites are unreliable unless you have a very good reason for
  believing otherwise. "Be judicious"

- If you find a news article, follow it to the primary source and cite that.

- NIH Reporter database (tells who got funding on what research)
